Laurence of Canterbury

tagline From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia /tagline subtitle /subtitle jumpto Jump to: navigation , search /jumpto bodycontent This article is about the Archbishop of Canterbury.  For other saints of this name, see Saint Lawrence (disambiguation) . Laurence Archbishop of Canterbury Gravestone marking the site of Laurence's burial in St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury Diocese Diocese of Canterbury Appointed circa ( c. ) 604 Reign ended 2 February 619 Predecessor Augustine of Canterbury Successor Mellitus Orders Consecration c. 604 Personal details Died 2 February 619 Buried St Augustine's Abbey Sainthood Feast day 3 February Venerated in Eastern Orthodox Church Roman Catholic Church Anglican Communion Canonized Pre-Congregation Shrines St Augustine's Abbey Laurence (sometimes Lawrence [ 1 ] or Laurentius ; [ 2 ] died 2 February 619 AD ) was the second Archbishop of Canterbury from about 604 to 619. He was a member of the Gregorian mission sent from Italy to England to Christianize the Anglo-Saxons from their native Anglo-Saxon paganism , although the date of his arrival is disputed. He was consecrated archbishop by his predecessor, Augustine of Canterbury , during Augustine's lifetime, in order to ensure continuity in the office. While archbishop, he attempted unsuccessfully to resolve differences with the native British bishops by corresponding with them about points of dispute. Laurence faced a crisis following the death of King Æthelberht of Kent , when the king's successor abandoned Christianity; he eventually reconverted. Laurence was revered as a saint after his death in 619. Contents 1 Early life 2 Archbishop 3 Pagan reaction 4 Death and legacy 5 See also 6 Citations 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links [ edit ] Early life Laurence was part of the Gregorian mission originally dispatched from Rome in 595 to convert the Anglo-Saxons from their native paganism to Christianity; he landed at Thanet , Kent , with Augustine in 597, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] or, as some sources state, first arrived in 601 and was not a part of the first group of missionaries. [ 5 ] [ 6 ] He had been a monk in Rome before his travels to England, [ 3 ] but nothing else is known of his history or background. [ 7 ] The medieval chronicler Bede says that Augustine sent Laurence back to Pope Gregory I to report on the success of converting King Æthelberht of Kent and to carry a letter with questions for the pope. Accompanied by Peter of Canterbury , another missionary, he set off some time after July 598, and had returned by June 601. [ 8 ] He brought back with him Gregory's replies to Augustine's questions, a document commonly known as the Libellus responsionum , that Bede incorporated in his Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum . [ 2 ] Laurence is probably the Laurence referred to in the letter from Gregory to Bertha , queen of Kent. In that letter, Gregory praises Bertha for her part in the conversion of her husband, details of which Gregory says he received from Laurence the priest. [ 9 ] It is known that Laurence returned to England with Mellitus and others of the second group of missionaries in the summer of 601, but there is no record of Peter being with them. [ 10 ] Map of some of the English kingdoms as of about 600 AD; click for larger view [ edit ] Archbishop Laurence succeeded Augustine to the see of Canterbury in about 604, and ruled until his death on 2 February 619. [ 3 ] [ 11 ] To secure the succession, Augustine had consecrated Laurence before he died, even though that was prohibited by canon law . [ 2 ] Augustine was afraid though that if someone did not step into the office immediately, it would damage the missionary efforts in Britain. [ 6 ] [ 12 ] However, Laurence never received a pallium from Rome, so he may have been considered uncanonical by the papacy. [ 13 ] Bede makes a point of comparing Augustine's action in consecrating Laurence to Saint Peter's action of consecrating Clement as Bishop of Rome during Peter's lifetime, which the theologian J. Robert Wright believes may be Bede's way of criticising the practices of the church in his day. [ 14 ] In 610 Laurence received letters from Pope Boniface IV , addressed to him as archbishop and Augustine's successor. [ 15 ] The correspondence was in response to Laurence having sent Mellitus to Rome earlier in 610, to solicit advice from the papacy on matters concerning the English Church. While in Rome Mellitus attended a synod , and brought the synodical decrees back with him to Laurence. [ 16 ] In 613 Laurence consecrated the monastery church built by Augustine in Canterbury, and dedicated it to saints Peter and Paul ; it was later re-consecrated as St Augustine's Abbey , Canterbury. [ 3 ] Laurence also wrote to the bishops in the lands held by the Scots and by the Britons , urging them to hold Easter on the day that the Roman church celebrated it, instead of their traditional date, part of the Easter controversy . [ 3 ] The letter is also preserved in Bede's history. [ 17 ] Laurence in 609 stated that Dagan , a native bishop, would not eat with Laurence or share a roof with the archbishop, due to the differences between the two Churches. [ 18 ] [ edit ] Pagan reaction The evangelist portrait of Luke, from the St. Augustine Gospels (c. 6th century), which were probably used by Laurence. Æthelberht died in 616, during Laurence's tenure; his son Eadbald abandoned Christianity in favour of Anglo-Saxon paganism, forcing many of the Gregorian missionaries to flee the pagan backlash that followed Æthelberht's death. [ 12 ] Among them in Gaul were Mellitus, who was Bishop of London , and Justus , who was Bishop of Rochester . [ 19 ] Remaining in Britain, Laurence succeeded in reconverting Eadbald to Christianity. [ 12 ] Bede relates the story that Laurence had been prepared to give up when he was visited by St Peter in a dream or vision. St Peter chastised Laurence and whipped him, and the marks of the whipping remained after the vision or dream ended. Laurence then displayed them to Eadbald, and the king was converted on the spot. [ 20 ] Bede, however, hints that it was the death of some of the leaders of the pagan party in battle that really persuaded Laurence to stay. [ 16 ] According to Benedicta Ward, a historian of Christianity, Bede uses the story of the whipping as an example of how suffering was a reminder of Christ's suffering for humans, and how that example could lead to conversion. [ 21 ] Wright argues that another point Bede is making is that it is because of the intercession of St Peter himself that the mission continued. [ 22 ] David Farmer, in the Oxford Dictionary of Saints , suggests that the whipping story may been a blending of the Quo Vadis story with some information given by Jerome in a letter. [ 23 ] Modern historians have seen political overtones in the pagan reaction. The historian D. P. Kirby sees Eadbald's actions as a repudiation of his father's pro- Frankish policies. [ 19 ] Alcuin , a later medieval writer, wrote that Laurence was "censured by apostolic authority". [ 24 ] This may have been a letter from Pope Adeodatus I , commanding Laurence to stay in Kent. Kirby goes on to argue that it was Justus, not Laurence, who converted Eadbald, and this while Justus was archbishop, sometime around 624. [ 19 ] Not all historians agree with this argument, however. Nicholas Brooks states that the king was converted during Laurence's archiepiscopate, within a year of him succeeding his father. [ 3 ] The historian Barbara Yorke argues that there were two co-rulers of Kent after Æthelberht's death, Eadbald and a Æthelwald, and that Eadbald was converted by Laurence while Æthelwald was converted by Justus after his return to Rochester. [ 25 ] Another factor in the pagan reaction was Laurence's objection to Eadbald's marriage to his father's widow, something that Christians considered to be unlawful. [ 26 ] All efforts to extend the church beyond Kent encountered difficulties due to the attitude of King Rædwald of East Anglia , who had become the leading king in the south after Æthelberht's death. [ 27 ] Rædwald was converted before the death of Æthelberht, perhaps at the urging of Æthelberht, but his kingdom was not, and Rædwald seems to have converted only to the extent of placing a Christian altar in his pagan temple. [ 28 ] It proved impossible for Mellitus to return to London as bishop, although Justus did resume his duties at Rochester. [ 19 ] [ edit ] Death and legacy Laurence died on 2 February 619, and was buried in the abbey of St Peter and Paul in Canterbury, later renamed St Augustine's; his relics , or remains, were moved, or translated , to the new church of St Augustine's in 1091. [ 3 ] His shrine was in the axial chapel of the abbey church, flanking the shrine of Augustine, his predecessor. [ 29 ] Laurence came to be regarded as a saint, and was given the feast day of 3 February. [ 30 ] The ninth century Stowe Missal commemorates his feast day, along with Mellitus and Justus. [ 31 ] A Vita (or Life ) was written about the time of his translation, by Goscelin , but it is mainly based on information in Bede. [ 3 ] His tomb was opened in 1915. Besides his feast day, the date of his translation, 13 September, was also celebrated after his death. [ 23 ] Laurence's tenure as archbishop is mainly remembered for his failure to secure a settlement with the Celtic church, and for his reconversion of Eadbald following Æthelbert's death. [ 13 ] He was succeeded as archbishop by Mellitus, the Bishop of London. [ 11 ] [ edit ] See also List of members of the Gregorian mission [ edit ] Citations ^ Blair World of Bede p. 85 ^ a b c Lapidge "Laurentius" Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Anglo-Saxon England ^ a b c d e f g h Brooks " Laurence (d. 619) " Oxford Dictionary of National Biography ^ Stenton Anglo-Saxon England p. 106 ^ Hindley Brief History of the Anglo-Saxons p. 36 ^ a b Brooks Early History of the Church of Canterbury pp. 9–13 ^ Blair World of Bede p. 59 ^ Blair World of Bede p. 63 ^ Blair World of Bede p. 60 ^ Blair World of Bede p. 66 ^ a b Fryde, et al. Handbook of British Chronology p. 213 ^ a b c Hindley A Brief History of the Anglo-Saxons p. 43 ^ a b Stenton Anglo-Saxon England pp. 112–113 ^ Wright Companion to Bede p. 47 ^ Blair World of Bede p. 80 ^ a b Blair World of Bede pp. 86–87 ^ Bede History of the English Church and People pp. 105–107 ^ Décarreaux Monks and Civilization p. 261 ^ a b c d Kirby Earliest English Kings pp. 30–33 ^ Brooks Early History of the Church of Canterbury pp. 64–66 ^ Ward Venerable Bede pp. 120–121 ^ Wright Companion to Bede pp. 48–50 ^ a b Farmer Oxford Dictionary of Saints pp. 313–314 ^ Quoted in Kirby Earliest English Kings p. 31 ^ Yorke Kings and Kingdoms p. 32 ^ Yorke Conversion p. 123 ^ Stenton Anglo-Saxon England p. 127 ^ Stenton Anglo-Saxon England p. 112 ^ Nilson Cathedral Shrines p. 67 ^ Walsh A New Dictionary of Saints p. 357 ^ Farmer Oxford Dictionary of Saints p. 366 [ edit ] References Bede ; translated by Leo Sherley-Price (1988). A History of the English Church and People . New York: Penguin Classics. ISBN 0-14-044042-9 . Blair, Peter Hunter (1990). The World of Bede (Reprint of 1970 ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-39819-3 . Brooks, Nicholas (1984). The Early History of the Church of Canterbury: Christ Church from 597 to 1066 . London: Leicester University Press. ISBN 0-7185-0041-5 . Brooks, N. P. (2004). "Laurence (d. 619)" (subscription or UK public library membership required). Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (October 2005 revised ed.). Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/16166 . http://www.oxforddnb.com/view/article/16166 . Retrieved 7 November 2007 . Décarreaux, Jean (1964). Monks and Civilization: From the Barbarian Invasions to the Reign of Charlemagne . Charlotte Haldane (trans.). London: George Allen. Delaney, John P. (1980). Dictionary of Saints (Second ed.). Garden City, NY: Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-13594-7 . Farmer, David Hugh (2004). Oxford Dictionary of Saints (Fifth ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-860949-0 . Fryde, E. B.; Greenway, D. E; Porter, S; Roy, I. (1996). Handbook of British Chronology (Third revised ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-56350-X . Hindley, Geoffrey (2006). A Brief History of the Anglo-Saxons: The Beginnings of the English Nation . New York: Carroll & Graf Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7867-1738-5 . Kirby, D. P. (2000). The Earliest English Kings . New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-24211-8 . Lapidge, Michael (2001). "Laurentius". In Lapidge, Michael; Blair, John; Keynes, Simon; Scragg, Donald. The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Anglo-Saxon England . Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. p. 279. ISBN 978-0-631-22492-1 . Nilson, Ben (1998). Cathedral Shrines of Medieval England . Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press. ISBN 0-85115-540-5 . Stenton, F. M. (1971). Anglo-Saxon England (Third ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280139-5 . Walsh, Michael J. (2007). A New Dictionary of Saints: East and West . London: Burns & Oats. ISBN 0-86012-438-X . Ward, Benedicta (1990). The Venerable Bede . Harrisburg, PA: Morehouse Publishing. ISBN 0-8192-1494-9 . Wright, J. Robert (2008). A Companion to Bede: A Reader's Commentary on The Ecclesiastical History of the English People . Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans. ISBN 978-0-8028-6309-6 . Yorke, Barbara (2006). The Conversion of Britain: Religion, Politics and Society in Britain c. 600–800 . London: Pearson/Longman. ISBN 0-582-77292-3 . Yorke, Barbara (1997). Kings and Kingdoms of Early Anglo-Saxon England . New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-16639-X . [ edit ] Further reading Sharpe, R. (1995). "The setting to St Augustine's translation, 1091". In R. Eales and R. Sharpe. Canterbury and the Norman conquest . pp. 1–13. [ edit ] External links Laurence of Canterbury – listing of most contemporary and close to contemporary mentions of Laurence in the primary sources . Includes some spurious charter listings. From the Prosopography of Anglo Saxon England project. Catholic Church titles Preceded by Augustine of Canterbury Archbishop of Canterbury 604–619 Succeeded by Mellitus v t e Archbishops of Canterbury Pre- Conquest Augustine Laurence Mellitus Justus Honorius Deusdedit Wighard Theodore of Tarsus Berhtwald Tatwine Nothhelm Cuthbert Bregowine Jænberht Æthelhard Wulfred Feologild Ceolnoth Æthelred Plegmund Athelm Wulfhelm Oda Ælfsige Byrhthelm Dunstan Æthelgar Sigeric the Serious Ælfric of Abingdon Ælfheah Lyfing Æthelnoth Eadsige Robert of Jumièges Stigand Conquest– Reformation Lanfranc Anselm Ralph d'Escures William de Corbeil Theobald of Bec Thomas Becket Roger de Bailleul Richard of Dover Baldwin of Forde Reginald Fitz Jocelin Hubert Walter Reginald John de Gray Stephen Langton Walter d'Eynsham Richard le Grant Ralph Neville John of Sittingbourne John Blund Edmund Rich Boniface William Chillenden Robert Kilwardby Robert Burnell John Peckham Robert Winchelsey Thomas Cobham Walter Reynolds Simon Mepeham John de Stratford John de Ufford Thomas Bradwardine Simon Islip William Edington Simon Langham William Whittlesey Simon Sudbury William Courtenay Thomas Arundel Roger Walden Thomas Arundel Henry Chichele John Stafford John Kemp Thomas Bourchier John Morton Thomas Langton Henry Deane William Warham Thomas Cranmer Reginald Pole Post-Reformation Matthew Parker Edmund Grindal John Whitgift Richard Bancroft George Abbot William Laud William Juxon Gilbert Sheldon William Sancroft John Tillotson Thomas Tenison William Wake John Potter Thomas Herring Matthew Hutton Thomas Secker Frederick Cornwallis John Moore Charles Manners-Sutton William Howley John Sumner Charles Longley Archibald Tait Edward Benson Frederick Temple Randall Davidson Cosmo Lang William Temple Geoffrey Fisher Michael Ramsey Donald Coggan Robert Runcie George Carey Rowan Williams v t e Members of the Gregorian mission Augustine of Canterbury Honorius of Canterbury James the Deacon Justus Laurence of Canterbury Mellitus Paulinus of York Peter of Canterbury Romanus (Bishop of Rochester) v t e Saints of Anglo-Saxon England British / Welsh / Irish Alban of St Albans Aldatus of Oxford Amphibalus of St Albans Arilda of Oldbury Barloc of Norbury Brannoc of Braunton Branwalator of Milton Credan of Bodmin Congar of Congresbury Dachuna of Bodmin Decuman of Watchet Elfin of Warrington Ivo of Ramsey Judoc of Winchester Juthwara of Sherbourne Melorius of Amesbury Nectan of Hartland Neot of St Neots Patrick of Glastonbury Rumon of Tavistock Samson of Dol Sativola of Exeter Urith of Chittlehampton East Anglian Æthelberht of East Anglia Æthelburh of Faremoutiers Æthelflæd of Ramsey Æthelthryth of Ely Æthelwine of Lindsey Athwulf of Thorney Blitha of Martham Botwulf of Thorney Cissa of Crowland Cuthbald of Peterborough Eadmund of East Anglia Eadnoth of Ramsey Guthlac of Crowland Herefrith of Thorney Hiurmine of Blythburgh Huna of Thorney Pega of Peakirk Regenhere of Northampton Seaxburh of Ely Tancred of Thorney Torthred of Thorney Tova of Thorney Walstan of Bawburgh Wihtburh of Ely Wulfric of Holme East Saxon Æthelburh of Barking Hildelith of Barking Osgyth Sæbbi of London Frisian, Frankish and Old Saxon Balthild of Romsey Bertha of Kent Felix of Dommoc Grimbald of St Bertin Monegunda of Watton Odwulf of Evesham Wulfram of Grantham Irish and Scottish Aidan of Lindisfarne Boisil of Melrose Echa of Crayke Ultan the Scribe Indract of Glastonbury Maildub of Malmesbury Kentish Æbbe of Thanet Æthelberht of Kent Æthelburh of Kent Æthelred of Kent Albinus of Canterbury Berhtwald of Canterbury Deusdedit of Canterbury Eadburh of Thanet Eanswith of Folkestone Eormengyth of Thanet Nothhelm of Canterbury Sigeburh of Thanet Mercian Ælfnoth of Stowe Ælfthryth of Crowland Æthelberht of Bedford Æthelmod of Leominster Æthelred of Mercia Æthelwine of Coln Æthelwynn of Sodbury Beonna of Breedon Beorhthelm of Stafford Coenwulf of Mercia Cotta of Breedon Credan of Evesham Cyneburh of Castor Cyneburh of Gloucester Kenelm of Winchcombe Cyneswith of Peterborough Eadburh of Bicester Eadburh of Pershore Eadburh of Southwell Eadgyth of Aylesbury Eadweard of Maugersbury Ealdgyth of Stortford Earconwald of London Ecgwine of Evesham Freomund of Mercia Frithuric of Breedon Frithuswith of Oxford Frithuwold of Chertsey Hæmma of Leominster Merefin Mildburh of Wenlock Mildgyth Mildthryth of Thanet Milred of Worcester Oda of Canterbury Oswald of Worcester Osburh of Coventry Rumwold of Buckingham Tibba of Ryhall Werburgh of Chester Wærstan Wigstan of Repton Wulfhild of Barking Northumbrian Acca of Hexham Æbbe "the Elder" of Coldingham Æbbe "the Younger" of Coldingham Ælfflæd of Whitby Ælfwald of Northumbria Æthelburh of Hackness Æthelgyth of Coldingham Æthelsige of Ripon Æthelwold of Farne Æthelwold of Lindisfarne Alchhild of Middleham Alchmund of Hexham Alchmund of Derby Balthere of Tyningham Beda of Jarrow Bega of Copeland Benedict Biscop Bercthun of Beverley Billfrith of Lindisfarne Bosa of York Botwine of Ripon Ceadda of Lichfield Cedd of Lichfield Ceolfrith of Monkwearmouth Ceolwulf of Northumbria Cuthbert of Durham Dryhthelm of Melrose Eadberht of Lindisfarne Eadfrith of Leominster Eadfrith of Lindisfarne Eadwine of Northumbria Ealdberht of Ripon Eanmund Eardwulf of Northumbria Eata of Hexham Ecgberht of Ripon Eoda Eosterwine of Monkwearmouth Hilda of Whitby Hyglac Iwig of Wilton John of Beverley Osana of Howden Osthryth of Bardney Oswald of Northumbria Oswine of Northumbria Sicgred of Ripon Sigfrith of Monkwearmouth Tatberht of Ripon Wihtberht of Ripon Wilfrith of Hexham Wilfrith II Wilgisl of Ripon Roman Augustine of Canterbury Firmin of North Crawley Birinus of Dorchester Blaise Florentius of Peterborough Hadrian of Canterbury Honorius of Canterbury Justus of Canterbury Laurence of Canterbury Mellitus of Canterbury Paulinus of York Theodore of Canterbury South Saxon Cuthflæd of Lyminster Cuthmann of Steyning Leofwynn of Bishopstone West Saxon Æbbe of Abingdon Ælfgar of Selwood Ælfgifu of Exeter Ælfgifu of Shaftesbury Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælfheah of Winchester Æthelflæd of Romsey Æthelgar of Canterbury Æthelnoth of Canterbury Æthelwine of Athelney Æthelwold of Winchester Aldhelm of Sherbourne Benignus of Glastonbury Beocca of Chertsey Beorhthelm of Shaftesbury Beornstan of Winchester Beornwald of Bampton Centwine of Wessex Cuthburh of Wimborn Cwenburh of Wimborne Dunstan of Canterbury Eadburh of Winchester Eadgar of England Eadgyth of Polesworth Eadgyth of Wilton Eadweard the Confessor Eadweard the Martyr Eadwold of Cerne Earmund of Stoke Fleming Edor of Chertsey Evorhilda Frithestan of Winchester Hædde of Winchester Humbert of Stokenham Hwita of Whitchurch Canonicorum Mærwynn of Romsey Margaret of Dunfermline Swithhun of Winchester Wulfsige of Sherborne Wulfthryth of Wilton Unclear origin Rumbold of Mechelen Persondata Name Laurence of Canterbury Alternative names Lawrence; Laurentius Short description Archbishop of Canterbury; Saint Date of birth Place of birth Date of death 3 February 619 Place of death