Richard Nixon

tagline From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia /tagline subtitle /subtitle jumpto Jump to: navigation , search /jumpto bodycontent "Nixon" redirects here. For other uses, see Nixon (disambiguation) .  For other people named Nixon, see Nixon (surname) . Richard Nixon 37th President of the United States In office January 20, 1969 – August 9, 1974 Vice President Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Preceded by Lyndon Johnson Succeeded by Gerald Ford 36th Vice President of the United States In office January 20, 1953 – January 20, 1961 President Dwight Eisenhower Preceded by Alben Barkley Succeeded by Lyndon Johnson United States Senator from California In office December 4, 1950 – January 1, 1953 Preceded by Sheridan Downey Succeeded by Thomas Kuchel Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from California's 12th district In office January 3, 1947 – December 1, 1950 Preceded by Jerry Voorhis Succeeded by Patrick Hillings Personal details Born Richard Milhous Nixon January 9, 1913 ( 1913-01-09 ) Yorba Linda , California , US Died April 22, 1994 ( 1994-04-22 ) (aged 81) New York City , New York , US Resting place Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum , Yorba Linda, California 33°53′21″N 117°49′10″W ﻿ / ﻿ 33.88917°N 117.81944°W ﻿ / 33.88917; -117.81944 Political party Republican Spouse(s) Pat Ryan (1940–1993, died) Children Tricia Julie Alma mater Whittier College Duke University Profession Lawyer Religion Quaker Signature Military service Service/branch United States Navy Years of service 1942–46 Rank Lieutenant commander Battles/wars World War II • Pacific War Awards American Campaign Medal Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal (2 service stars ) World War II Victory Medal Richard Milhous Nixon (January 9, 1913 – April 22, 1994) was the 37th President of the United States , serving from 1969 to 1974. The only president to resign the office, Nixon had previously served as a US representative and senator from California and as the 36th Vice President of the United States from 1953 to 1961. Nixon was born in Yorba Linda , California. After completing his undergraduate work at Whittier College , he graduated from Duke University School of Law in 1937, and returned to California to practice law. He and his wife, Pat Nixon , moved to Washington to work for the federal government in 1942. He subsequently served in the United States Navy during World War II . Nixon was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946 and to the Senate in 1950 . His pursuit of the Hiss Case established his reputation as a leading anti-communist, and elevated him to national prominence. He was the running mate of Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Republican Party presidential nominee in the 1952 election . Nixon served for eight years as vice president . He waged an unsuccessful presidential campaign in 1960 , narrowly losing to John F. Kennedy , and lost a race for Governor of California in 1962 . In 1968, he ran again for the presidency and was elected . Although Nixon initially escalated the war in Vietnam, he subsequently ended US involvement in 1973. Nixon's visit to the People's Republic of China in 1972 opened diplomatic relations between the two nations, and he initiated détente and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with the Soviet Union the same year. Domestically, his administration generally embraced policies that transferred power from Washington to the states. Among other things, he initiated wars on cancer and drugs , imposed wage and price controls, enforced desegregation of Southern schools and established the Environmental Protection Agency . Though he presided over Apollo 11 , he scaled back manned space exploration. He was reelected by a landslide in 1972. Nixon's second term saw an Arab oil embargo , the resignation of his vice president, Spiro Agnew , and a continuing series of revelations about the Watergate scandal . The scandal escalated, costing Nixon much of his political support, and on August 9, 1974, he resigned in the face of almost certain impeachment and removal from office. After his resignation, he was controversially issued a pardon by his successor, Gerald Ford . In retirement, Nixon's work authoring several books and undertaking many foreign trips helped to rehabilitate his public image as an elder statesman. He suffered a debilitating stroke on April 18, 1994, and died four days later at the age of 81. Nixon remains a source of considerable interest among historians and the public. Contents 1 Early life 2 Early career, marriage and war service 3 Rising politician 3.1 Congressional career 3.2 Vice president 3.3 1960 and 1962 elections; wilderness years 4 1968 presidential election 5 Presidency (1969–74) 5.1 Foreign policy 5.1.1 China 5.1.2 Vietnam War 5.1.3 Latin American policy 5.1.4 Soviet Union 5.1.5 Middle Eastern policy 5.2 Domestic policy 5.2.1 Economy 5.2.2 Governmental initiatives and organization 5.2.3 US space program 5.2.4 Civil rights 5.3 Reelection, Watergate scandal, and resignation 5.3.1 1972 presidential campaign 5.3.2 Watergate 5.3.3 Resignation 6 Later years and death 6.1 Pardon and illness 6.2 Return to public life 6.3 Author and elder statesman 6.4 Death and funeral 7 Legacy 8 Personality and public image 9 See also 10 Notes 11 External links Early life Nixon was born to Francis A. Nixon and Hannah Milhous Nixon on January 9, 1913, in a house his father built in Yorba Linda, California. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] His mother was a Quaker (his father converted from Methodism after his marriage), and his upbringing was marked by conservative Quaker observances of the time, such as refraining from alcohol, dancing, and swearing. Nixon had four brothers: Harold (1909–33), Donald (1914–87), Arthur (1918–25), and Edward (born 1930). [ 3 ] Four of the five Nixon boys were named after kings who had ruled in historical or legendary England; Richard, for example, was named after Richard the Lionheart . [ 4 ] Nixon (second from right) makes his newspaper debut in 1916, contributing five cents to a fund for war orphans. Donald is to the left of his brother. Nixon's early life was marked by hardship, and he later quoted a saying of Eisenhower to describe his boyhood: "We were poor, but the glory of it was, we didn't know it." [ 5 ] The Nixon family ranch failed in 1922, and the family moved to Whittier , California. In an area with many Quakers, Frank Nixon opened a grocery store and gas station. [ 6 ] Richard's younger brother Arthur died in 1925 after a short illness. [ 7 ] At the age of twelve, Richard was found to have a spot on his lung, and with a family history of tuberculosis , he was forbidden to play sports. Eventually, the spot was found to be scar tissue from an early bout of pneumonia. [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Young Richard attended East Whittier Elementary School, where he was president of his eighth-grade class. [ 10 ] His parents believed that attendance at Whittier High School had caused Richard's older brother Harold to live a dissolute lifestyle before the older boy fell ill of tuberculosis (he died of the disease in 1933). Instead, they sent Richard to the larger Fullerton Union High School . [ 11 ] [ 12 ] He received excellent grades, even though he had to ride a school bus for an hour each way during his freshman year—later, he lived with an aunt in Fullerton during the week. [ 13 ] He played junior varsity football, and rarely missed a practice, even though he was rarely used in games. [ 14 ] He had greater success as a debater, winning a number of championships and taking his only formal tutelage in public speaking from Fullerton's Head of English, H. Lynn Sheller. Nixon later remembered Sheller's words, "Remember, speaking is conversation ... don't shout at people. Talk to them. Converse with them." [ 15 ] Nixon stated that he tried to use the conversational tone as much as possible. [ 15 ] His parents permitted Richard to transfer to Whittier High School for his junior year, beginning in September 1928. At Whittier High, Nixon suffered his first electoral defeat, for student body president. He generally rose at 4 a.m., to drive the family truck into Los Angeles and purchase vegetables at the market. He then drove to the store to wash and display them, before going to school. Harold had been diagnosed with tuberculosis the previous year; when their mother took him to Arizona in the hopes of improving his health, the demands on Richard increased, causing him to give up football. Nevertheless Richard graduated from Whittier High third in his class of 207 students. [ 16 ] Nixon was offered a tuition grant to attend Harvard University , but Harold's continued illness and the need for their mother to care for him meant Richard was needed at the store. He remained in his hometown and attended Whittier College , his expenses there covered by a bequest from his maternal grandfather. [ 17 ] Nixon played for the basketball team; he also tried out for football, but lacked the size to play. He remained on the team as a substitute, and was noted for his enthusiasm. [ 18 ] Instead of fraternities and sororities, Whittier had literary societies. Nixon was snubbed by the only one for men, the Franklins; many members of the Franklins were from prominent families but Nixon was not. He responded by helping to found a new society, the Orthogonian Society. [ 19 ] In addition to the society, schoolwork, and work at the store, Nixon found time for a large number of extracurricular activities, becoming a champion debater and gaining a reputation as a hard worker. [ 20 ] In 1933, he became engaged to Ola Florence Welch, daughter of the Whittier police chief. The two broke up in 1935. [ 21 ] After his graduation from Whittier in 1934, Nixon received a full scholarship to attend Duke University School of Law . [ 22 ] The school was new and sought to attract top students by offering scholarships. [ 23 ] It paid high salaries to its professors, many of whom had national or international reputations. [ 24 ] The number of scholarships was greatly reduced for second and third year students, forcing recipients into intense competition. [ 23 ] Nixon not only kept his scholarship but was elected president of the Duke Bar Association [ 25 ] and graduated third in his class in June 1937. [ 22 ] He later wrote of his alma mater: "I always remember that whatever I have done in the past or may do in the future, Duke University is responsible in one way or another." [ 26 ] Early career, marriage and war service After graduating from Duke, Nixon initially hoped to join the Federal Bureau of Investigation . He received no response to his letter of application and learned years later that he had been hired, but his appointment had been canceled at the last minute due to budget cuts. [ 27 ] Instead, he returned to California and was admitted to the bar in 1937. He began practicing with the law firm Wingert and Bewley in Whittier, [ 22 ] working on commercial litigation for local petroleum companies and other corporate matters, as well as on wills . [ 28 ] In later years, Nixon proudly stated that he was the only modern president to have previously worked as a practicing attorney. Nixon was reluctant to work on divorce cases, disliking frank sexual talk from women. [ 29 ] In 1938, he opened up his own branch of Wingert and Bewley in La Habra , California, [ 30 ] and became a full partner in the firm the following year. [ 31 ] In January 1938, Nixon was cast in the Whittier Community Players production of The Dark Tower . There he played opposite a high school teacher named Thelma "Pat" Ryan . [ 22 ] Nixon described it in his memoirs as "a case of love at first sight" [ 32 ] —for Nixon only, as Pat Ryan turned down the young lawyer several times before agreeing to date him. [ 33 ] Once they began their courtship, Ryan was reluctant to marry Nixon; the relationship dragged on two years before she assented to his proposal. They wed at a small ceremony on June 21, 1940. After a honeymoon in Mexico, the Nixons began their married life in Whittier. [ 34 ] They had two children, Tricia (born 1946) and Julie (born 1948). [ 35 ] In January 1942, the couple moved to Washington, D.C., where Nixon took a job at the Office of Price Administration . [ 22 ] In his political campaigns, Nixon would suggest that this was his response to Pearl Harbor , but he had sought the position throughout the latter part of 1941. Both Nixon and his wife believed he was limiting his prospects by remaining in Whittier. [ 36 ] He was assigned to the tire rationing division, where he was tasked with replying to correspondence. He did not enjoy the role, and four months later, applied to join the United States Navy . As a birthright Quaker, he could have claimed exemption from the draft , and deferments were routinely granted for those in government service. His application was successful, and he was inducted into the Navy in August 1942. [ 37 ] Nixon completed Officers Candidate School and was commissioned as an ensign in October 1942. His first post was as aide to the commander of the Ottumwa Naval Air Station in Iowa . Seeking more excitement, he requested sea duty and was reassigned as the naval passenger control officer for the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command , supporting the logistics of operations in the South West Pacific theater . [ 38 ] [ 39 ] After requesting more challenging duties, he was given command of cargo handling units. [ 40 ] Nixon earned two service stars and a citation of commendation, although he saw no actual combat. Upon his return to the US, Nixon was appointed the administrative officer of the Alameda Naval Air Station in California. In January 1945, he was transferred to the Bureau of Aeronautics office in Philadelphia to help negotiate the termination of war contracts, and he received another letter of commendation for his work there. [ 41 ] Later, Nixon was transferred to other offices to work on contracts and finally to Baltimore. [ 42 ] In October 1945, he was promoted to lieutenant commander . [ 41 ] He resigned his commission on New Year's Day 1946. [ 43 ] Rising politician Richard and Pat Nixon introduce General Dwight D. Eisenhower —Richard Nixon's running mate—to their daughters Tricia (standing) and Julie (carried by her father), Washington National Airport , September 10, 1952. Congressional career For more information on Nixon's congressional election campaigns, see California's 12th congressional district election, 1946 and United States Senate election in California, 1950 . In 1945, Republicans in California's 12th congressional district , frustrated by their inability to defeat Democratic Congressman Jerry Voorhis , sought a consensus candidate who would run a strong campaign against him. They formed a "Committee of 100" to decide on a candidate, hoping to avoid internal dissensions which had led to Voorhis victories. After the committee failed to attract higher-profile candidates, Herman Perry, Whittier's Bank of America branch manager, suggested Nixon, a family friend with whom he had served on the Whittier College Board of Trustees before the war. Perry wrote to Nixon in Baltimore. After a night of excited talk between the Nixons, the naval officer responded to Perry with enthusiasm. Nixon flew to California and was selected by the committee. When he left the Navy at the start of 1946, Nixon and his wife returned to Whittier, where Nixon began a year of intensive campaigning. [ 44 ] [ 45 ] He contended that Voorhis had been ineffective as a congressman and suggested that Voorhis's endorsement by a group linked to communists meant that Voorhis must have radical views. [ 46 ] Nixon won the election, receiving 65,586 votes to Voorhis' 49,994. [ 47 ] In Congress, Nixon supported the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947 and served on the Education and Labor Committee . He was part of the Herter Committee, which went to Europe to report on the need for US foreign aid. Nixon was the youngest member of the committee, and the only Westerner. [ 48 ] Advocacy by Herter Committee members, including Nixon, led to congressional passage of the Marshall Plan . [ 49 ] Nixon campaigns for the Senate in 1950. Nixon first gained national attention in 1948 when his investigation, as a member of the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), broke the Alger Hiss spy case. While many doubted Whittaker Chambers ' allegations that Hiss, a former State Department official, had been a Soviet spy, Nixon believed them to be true. He discovered that Chambers saved microfilm reproductions of incriminating documents by hiding the film in a pumpkin. [ 50 ] Hiss was convicted of perjury in 1950 for denying under oath he had passed documents to Chambers. [ 51 ] In 1948, Nixon successfully cross-filed as a candidate in his district, winning both major party primaries, [ 52 ] and was comfortably reelected. [ 53 ] In 1949, Nixon began to consider running for the United States Senate against the Democratic incumbent, Sheridan Downey , [ 54 ] and entered the race in November of that year. [ 55 ] Downey, faced with a bitter primary battle with Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas , announced his retirement in March 1950. [ 56 ] Nixon and Douglas won the primary elections [ 57 ] and engaged in a contentious campaign in which the ongoing Korean War was a major issue. [ 58 ] Nixon tried to focus attention on Douglas' liberal voting record. As part of that effort, a " Pink Sheet " was distributed by the Nixon campaign suggesting that, as Douglas' voting record was similar to that of New York Congressman Vito Marcantonio (believed by some to be a communist), their political views must be nearly identical. [ 59 ] Nixon won the election by almost twenty percentage points. [ 60 ] In the Senate, Nixon took a prominent position in opposing global communism, traveling frequently and speaking out against "the threat". [ 61 ] He maintained friendly relations with his fellow anti-communist, the controversial Wisconsin senator, Joseph McCarthy , but was careful to keep some distance between himself and McCarthy's allegations. [ 62 ] Nixon also criticized President Harry S. Truman 's handling of the Korean War. [ 61 ] He supported statehood for Alaska and Hawaii, voted in favor of civil rights for minorities, and supported federal disaster relief for India and Yugoslavia. [ 63 ] He voted against price controls and other monetary restrictions, benefits for illegal immigrants, and public power. [ 63 ] Vice president A piece of literature for the Eisenhower–Nixon campaign, 1952 Further information: Checkers speech General Dwight D. Eisenhower was nominated for president by the Republicans in 1952. He had no strong preference for a vice presidential candidate, and Republican officeholders and party officials met in a " smoke-filled room " and recommended Nixon to the general, who agreed to the senator's selection. Nixon's youth (he was then 39), stance against communism, and his political base in California—one of the largest states—were all seen as vote-winners by the leaders. Among the candidates considered along with Nixon were Ohio Senator Robert Taft , New Jersey Governor Alfred Driscoll and Illinois Senator Everett Dirksen . [ 64 ] [ 65 ] On the campaign trail, Eisenhower spoke to his plans for the country, leaving the negative campaigning to his running mate . [ 66 ] In mid-September, the media reported that Nixon had a political fund, maintained by his backers, which reimbursed him for political expenses. Such a fund was not illegal, but it exposed Nixon to allegations of possible conflict of interest. With pressure building for Eisenhower to demand Nixon's resignation from the ticket , the senator went on television to deliver an address to the nation on September 23, 1952. [ 67 ] The address, later termed the Checkers speech , was heard by about 60 million Americans—including the largest television audience up to that point. [ 68 ] Nixon emotionally defended himself, stating that the fund was not secret, nor had donors received special favors. He painted himself as a man of modest means (his wife had no mink coat; instead she wore a "respectable Republican cloth coat") and a patriot. [ 67 ] The speech would be remembered for the gift which Nixon had received, but which he would not give back: "a little cocker spaniel dog ... sent all the way from Texas. And our little girl—Tricia, the 6-year-old—named it Checkers." [ 67 ] The speech was a masterpiece of rhetoric and prompted a huge public outpouring of support for Nixon. [ 69 ] Eisenhower decided to retain him on the ticket, [ 70 ] which proved victorious in the November election . [ 66 ] Eisenhower had pledged to give Nixon responsibilities during his term as vice president that would enable him to be effective from the start as a successor. Nixon attended Cabinet and National Security Council meetings and chaired them when Eisenhower was absent. A 1953 tour of the Far East succeeded in increasing local goodwill toward the United States and prompted Nixon to appreciate the potential of the region as an industrial center. He visited Saigon and Hanoi in French Indochina . [ 71 ] On his return to the United States at the end of 1953, Nixon increased the amount of time he devoted to foreign relations. [ 72 ] Biographer Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's congressional years, said of his vice presidency: Eisenhower radically altered the role of his running mate by presenting him with critical assignments in both foreign and domestic affairs once he assumed his office. The vice president welcomed the president's initiatives and worked energetically to accomplish White House objectives. Because of the collaboration between these two leaders, Nixon deserves the title, "the first modern vice president". [ 73 ] Despite intense campaigning by Nixon, who reprised his strong attacks on the Democrats, the Republicans lost control of both houses of Congress in the 1954 elections. These losses caused Nixon to contemplate leaving politics once he had served out his term. [ 74 ] On September 24, 1955, President Eisenhower suffered a heart attack; his condition was initially believed to be life-threatening. Eisenhower was unable to perform his duties for six weeks. The 25th Amendment to the United States Constitution had not yet been proposed, and the Vice President had no formal power to act. During this time, however, Nixon acted in Eisenhower's stead, presiding over Cabinet meetings and ensuring that aides and Cabinet officers did not seek power. [ 75 ] According to Nixon biographer Stephen Ambrose , Nixon had "earned the high praise he received for his conduct during the crisis ... he made no attempt to seize power". [ 76 ] His spirits buoyed, Nixon sought a second term, but some of Eisenhower's aides aimed to displace him. In a December 1955 meeting, Eisenhower proposed that Nixon not run for reelection in order to give him administrative experience before a 1960 presidential run and instead become a Cabinet officer in a second Eisenhower administration. Nixon, however, believed such an action would destroy his political career. When Eisenhower announced his reelection bid in February 1956, he hedged on the choice of his running mate, stating that it was improper to address that question until he had been renominated. Although no Republican was opposing Eisenhower, Nixon received a substantial number of write-in votes against the President in the 1956 New Hampshire primary election. In late April, the President announced that Nixon would again be his running mate. [ 77 ] Eisenhower and Nixon were reelected by a comfortable margin in the November 1956 election . [ 78 ] Vice President Nixon and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev argue as the press looks on in part of what came to be known as the Kitchen Debate , July 24, 1959. In the spring of 1957, Nixon undertook another major foreign trip, this time to Africa. On his return, he helped shepherd the Civil Rights Act of 1957 through Congress. The bill was weakened in the Senate, and civil rights leaders were divided over whether Eisenhower should sign it. Nixon advised the President to sign the bill, which he did. [ 79 ] Eisenhower suffered a mild stroke in November 1957, and Nixon gave a press conference, assuring the nation that the Cabinet was functioning well as a team during Eisenhower's brief illness. [ 80 ] On April 27, 1958, Richard and Pat Nixon embarked on a goodwill tour of South America. In Montevideo , Uruguay, Nixon made an impromptu visit to a college campus, where he fielded questions from students on US foreign policy. The trip was uneventful until the Nixon party reached Lima , Peru, where he was met with student demonstrations. Nixon went to the campus, got out of his car to confront the students, and stayed until forced back into the car by a volley of thrown objects. At his hotel, Nixon faced another mob, and one demonstrator spat on him. [ 81 ] In Caracas, Nixon and his wife were spat on by anti-American demonstrators and their limousine was attacked by a pipe-wielding mob. [ 82 ] According to Ambrose, Nixon's courageous conduct "caused even some of his bitterest enemies to give him some grudging respect". [ 83 ] In July 1959, President Eisenhower sent Nixon to the Soviet Union for the opening of the American National Exhibition in Moscow. On July 24, while touring the exhibits with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev , the two stopped at a model of an American kitchen and engaged in an impromptu exchange about the merits of capitalism versus communism that became known as the " Kitchen Debate ". [ 84 ] 1960 and 1962 elections; wilderness years Main article: United States presidential election, 1960 In 1960, Nixon launched his first campaign for President of the United States. He faced little opposition in the Republican primaries [ 85 ] and chose former Massachusetts Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. as his running mate. [ 86 ] His Democratic opponent was John F. Kennedy , and the race remained close for the duration. [ 87 ] Nixon campaigned on his experience, but Kennedy called for new blood and claimed the Eisenhower–Nixon administration had allowed the Soviet Union to overtake the US in ballistic missiles (the " missile gap "). [ 88 ] A new political medium was introduced in the campaign: televised presidential debates . In the first of four such debates, Nixon appeared pale, with a five o'clock shadow , in contrast to the photogenic Kennedy. [ 86 ] Nixon's performance in the debate was perceived to be mediocre in the visual medium of television, though many people listening on the radio thought that Nixon had won. [ 89 ] Nixon lost the election narrowly, with Kennedy ahead by only 120,000 votes (0.2 percent) in the popular vote. [ 86 ] Vice President Nixon and Vice President-elect Lyndon Johnson leave the White House on the morning of January 20, 1961, for the Kennedy–Johnson inaugural ceremonies. There were charges of vote fraud in Texas and Illinois, both states won by Kennedy; Nixon refused however to consider contesting the election, feeling a lengthy election contest would diminish the United States in the eyes of the world, and the uncertainty would hurt US interests. [ 90 ] At the end of his term of office as vice president in January 1961, Nixon and his family returned to California, where he practiced law and wrote a bestselling book, Six Crises , which included coverage of the Hiss case, Eisenhower's heart attack, and the Fund Crisis, which had been resolved by the Checkers speech. [ 86 ] [ 91 ] Local and national Republican leaders encouraged Nixon to challenge incumbent Pat Brown for Governor of California in the 1962 election . [ 86 ] Despite initial reluctance, Nixon entered the race. [ 86 ] The campaign was clouded by public suspicion that Nixon viewed the office as a stepping-stone for another presidential run, some opposition from the far-right of the party, and his own lack of interest in being California's governor. [ 86 ] Nixon hoped that a successful run would confirm him in his status as the nation's leading active Republican politician, and ensure he remained a major player in national politics. [ 92 ] Instead, he lost to Brown by nearly 300,000 votes, and the defeat was widely believed to be the end of his political career. [ 86 ] In an impromptu concession speech the morning after the election, Nixon blamed the media for favoring his opponent, saying, "You won't have Nixon to kick around anymore because, gentlemen, this is my last press conference". [ 93 ] The California defeat was highlighted in the November 11, 1962, episode of ABC 's Howard K. Smith: News and Comment entitled "The Political Obituary of Richard M. Nixon". [ 94 ] Alger Hiss appeared on the program, and many members of the public complained that it was unseemly to allow a convicted felon air time to attack a former vice president. The furor drove Smith and his program from the air, [ 95 ] and public sympathy for Nixon grew. [ 94 ] Nixon shows his papers to an East German officer to cross between the sectors of the divided city of Berlin, 1963. The Nixon family traveled to Europe in 1963, where Nixon gave press conferences and met with leaders of the countries he visited. [ 96 ] The family moved to New York City, where Nixon became a senior partner in the leading law firm Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie & Alexander . [ 86 ] Nixon had pledged, when announcing his California campaign, not to run for president in 1964; even if he had not, he believed it would be difficult to defeat Kennedy, or after his assassination , Kennedy's successor Lyndon Johnson. [ 97 ] In 1964, he supported Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater for the Republican nomination for president; when Goldwater was successful in gaining the nomination, Nixon was selected to introduce the candidate to the convention . Although he thought Goldwater unlikely to win, Nixon campaigned for him loyally. The election was a disaster for the Republicans; Goldwater's landslide loss to Johnson was matched by heavy losses for the party in Congress and among state governors. [ 98 ] Nixon was one of the few leading Republicans not blamed for the disastrous results, and he sought to build on that in the 1966 congressional elections. He campaigned for many Republicans seeking to regain seats lost in the Johnson landslide and received credit for helping the Republicans make major gains in the midterm election. [ 99 ] 1968 presidential election Main articles: Richard Nixon presidential campaign, 1968 and United States presidential election, 1968 Nixon and Johnson meet at the White House before Nixon's nomination, July 1968. At the end of 1967, Nixon told his family he planned to run for president a second time. Although Pat Nixon did not always enjoy public life [ 100 ] (for example, she had been embarrassed by the need to reveal how little the family owned in the Checkers speech), [ 101 ] she was supportive of her husband's ambitions. Nixon believed that with the Democrats torn over the issue of the Vietnam War , a Republican had a good chance of winning, although he expected the election to be as close as in 1960. [ 100 ] Motto on automobile trash bag given away by the Nixon campaign in California, 1968 One of the most tumultuous primary election seasons ever began as the Tet Offensive was launched, followed by the withdrawal of President Johnson as a candidate after doing unexpectedly poorly in the New Hampshire primary; it concluded with the assassination of one of the Democratic candidates, Senator Robert F. Kennedy just moments after his victory in the California primary. On the Republican side, Nixon's main opposition was Michigan Governor George Romney , though New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller and California Governor Ronald Reagan each hoped to be nominated in a brokered convention . Nixon secured the nomination on the first ballot. [ 102 ] He selected Maryland Governor Spiro Agnew as his running mate, a choice which Nixon believed would unite the party, appealing to both Northern moderates and Southerners disaffected with the Democrats. [ 103 ] Nixon's Democratic opponent in the general election was Vice President Hubert Humphrey , who was nominated at a convention marked by violent protests . [ 104 ] Throughout the campaign, Nixon portrayed himself as a figure of stability during a period of national unrest and upheaval. [ 104 ] He appealed to what he later called the " silent majority " of socially conservative Americans who disliked the hippie counterculture and the anti-war demonstrators. Agnew became an increasingly vocal critic of these groups, solidifying Nixon's position with the right. [ 105 ] Nixon waged a prominent television advertising campaign, meeting with supporters in front of cameras. [ 106 ] He stressed that the crime rate was too high, and attacked what he perceived as a surrender by the Democrats of the United States' nuclear superiority. [ 107 ] Nixon promised " peace with honor " in the Vietnam War and proclaimed that "new leadership will end the war and win the peace in the Pacific". [ 108 ] He did not release specifics of how he hoped to end the war, resulting in media intimations that he must have a " secret plan ". [ 108 ] His slogan of "Nixon's the One" proved to be effective. [ 106 ] In a three-way race between Nixon, Humphrey, and independent candidate Alabama Governor George Wallace , Nixon defeated Humphrey by nearly 500,000 votes (seven-tenths of a percentage point), with 301 electoral votes to 191 for Humphrey and 46 for Wallace. [ 104 ] [ 109 ] In his victory speech, Nixon pledged that his administration would try to bring the divided nation together . [ 110 ] Nixon said: "I have received a very gracious message from the Vice President, congratulating me for winning the election. I congratulated him for his gallant and courageous fight against great odds. I also told him that I know exactly how he felt. I know how it feels to lose a close one." [ 111 ] Presidency (1969–74) Nixon is sworn in as the 37th President on January 20, 1969, with the new First Lady, Pat, holding the family Bibles. Nixon was inaugurated as president on January 20, 1969, sworn in by his onetime political rival, Chief Justice Earl Warren . Pat Nixon held the family Bibles open at Isaiah 2:4, which reads, "They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks." In his inaugural address, which received almost uniformly positive reviews, Nixon remarked that "the greatest honor history can bestow is the title of peacemaker" [ 112 ] —a phrase that would later be placed on his gravestone. [ 113 ] He spoke about turning partisan politics into a new age of unity: In these difficult years, America has suffered from a fever of words; from inflated rhetoric that promises more than it can deliver; from angry rhetoric that fans discontents into hatreds; from bombastic rhetoric that postures instead of persuading. We cannot learn from one another until we stop shouting at one another, until we speak quietly enough so that our words can be heard as well as our voices. [ 114 ] Foreign policy Nixon and Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai toast during Nixon's 1972 visit to China. China Main article: 1972 Nixon visit to China President Nixon shakes hands with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai upon arriving in Beijing. Nixon laid the groundwork for his overture to China even before he became president, writing in Foreign Affairs a year before his election: "There is no place on this small planet for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isolation." [ 115 ] Assisting him in this venture was his National Security Advisor and future Secretary of State , Henry Kissinger , with whom the President worked closely, bypassing Cabinet officials. With relations between the Soviet Union and China at a nadir— border clashes between the two took place during Nixon's first year in office—Nixon sent private word to the Chinese that he desired closer relations. A breakthrough came in early 1971, when Chairman Mao invited a team of American table tennis players to visit China and play against top Chinese players. Nixon followed up by sending Kissinger to China for clandestine meetings with Chinese officials. [ 115 ] On July 15, 1971, it was simultaneously announced by Beijing and by Nixon (on television and radio) that the President would visit China the following February. The announcements astounded the world. [ 116 ] The secrecy allowed both sets of leaders time to prepare the political climate in their countries for the contact. [ 117 ] In February 1972, Nixon and his wife traveled to China. Kissinger briefed Nixon for over 40 hours in preparation. [ 118 ] Upon touching down, the President and First Lady emerged from Air Force One and greeted Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai . Nixon made a point of shaking Zhou's hand, something which then-Secretary of State John Foster Dulles had refused to do in 1954 when the two met in Geneva. [ 119 ] Over 100 television journalists accompanied the president. On Nixon's orders, television was strongly favored over printed publications, as Nixon felt that the medium would capture the visit much better than print. It also gave him the opportunity to snub the print journalists he despised. [ 119 ] President Nixon greets Chinese Communist Party Chairman Mao Zedong (left) in a historic visit to the People's Republic of China, 1972. Nixon and Kissinger met for an hour with Mao and Zhou at Mao's official private residence, where they discussed a range of issues. [ 120 ] Mao later told his doctor that he had been impressed by Nixon, whom he considered forthright, unlike the leftists and the Soviets. [ 120 ] He also said he was suspicious of Kissinger, [ 120 ] though the National Security Advisor referred to their meeting as his "encounter with history". [ 119 ] A formal banquet welcoming the presidential party was given that evening in the Great Hall of the People . The following day, Nixon met with Zhou; the joint communique following this meeting recognized Taiwan as a part of China, and looked forward to a peaceful solution to the problem of reunification. [ 121 ] When not in meetings, Nixon toured architectural wonders including the Forbidden City , Ming Tombs , and the Great Wall . [ 119 ] Americans received their first glimpse into Chinese life through the cameras which accompanied Pat Nixon, who toured the city of Beijing and visited communes, schools, factories, and hospitals. [ 119 ] The visit ushered in a new era of Sino-American relations. [ 104 ] Fearing the possibility of a Sino-American alliance, the Soviet Union yielded to pressure for détente with the United States. [ 122 ] Vietnam War Main articles: Vietnam War and Role of the United States in the Vietnam War When Nixon took office, about 300 American soldiers were dying each week in Vietnam, and the war was broadly unpopular in the United States, with violent protests against the war ongoing. The Johnson administration had agreed to suspend bombing in exchange for negotiations without preconditions, but this agreement never fully took force. Nixon sought some arrangement which would permit American forces to withdraw, while leaving South Vietnam secure against attack. [ 123 ] Nixon delivers an address to the nation about the bombings in Cambodia, April 30, 1969 Nixon approved a secret bombing campaign of North Vietnamese positions in Cambodia in March 1969 (code-named Operation Menu ) to destroy what was believed to be the headquarters of the Viet Cong . [ 124 ] These operations resulted in heavy bombing of Cambodia; by one measurement more bombs were dropped over Cambodia under Johnson and Nixon than the Allies dropped during World War II. [ 125 ] In mid-1969, Nixon began efforts to negotiate peace with the North Vietnamese, sending a personal letter to North Vietnamese leaders, and peace talks began in Paris. Initial talks, however, did not result in an agreement. [ 126 ] In July 1969, Nixon visited South Vietnam , where he met with his US military commanders and President Nguyen Van Thieu . Amid protests at home demanding an immediate pullout, he implemented a strategy of replacing American troops with Vietnamese troops , known as " Vietnamization ". [ 104 ] He soon instituted phased US troop withdrawals [ 127 ] but authorized incursions into Laos , in part to interrupt the Ho Chi Minh trail , used to supply North Vietnamese forces, that passed through Laos and Cambodia. Nixon announced the ground invasion of Cambodia to the American public on April 30, 1970. [ 128 ] His responses to protesters included an impromptu, early morning meeting with them at the Lincoln Memorial on May 9, 1970. [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] Nixon's campaign promise to curb the war, contrasted with the escalated bombing, led to claims that Nixon had a " credibility gap " on the issue. [ 127 ] In 1971, excerpts from the " Pentagon Papers ", which had been leaked by Daniel Ellsberg , were published by The New York Times and The Washington Post . When news of the leak first appeared, Nixon was inclined to do nothing; the Papers, a history of United States' involvement in Vietnam, mostly concerned the lies of prior administrations and contained few real revelations. He was persuaded by Kissinger that the papers were more harmful than they appeared, and the President tried to prevent publication. The Supreme Court eventually ruled for the newspapers. [ 132 ] As US troop withdrawals continued, conscription was reduced and in 1973 ended; the armed forces became all-volunteer. [ 133 ] After years of fighting, the Paris Peace Accords were signed at the beginning of 1973. The agreement implemented a cease fire and allowed for the withdrawal of remaining American troops; however, it did not require the 160,000 North Vietnam Army regulars located in the South to withdraw. [ 134 ] Once American combat support ended, there was a brief truce, before fighting broke out again, this time without American combat involvement. North Vietnam conquered South Vietnam in 1975. [ 135 ] Latin American policy Nixon and Mexican president Gustavo Díaz Ordaz riding a presidential motorcade in San Diego, California, September 1970. Nixon had been a firm supporter of Kennedy in the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion and 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis ; on taking office he stepped up covert operations against Cuba and its president, Fidel Castro . He maintained close relations with the Cuban-American exile community through his friend, Bebe Rebozo , who often suggested ways of irritating Castro. These activities concerned the Soviets and Cubans, who feared Nixon might attack Cuba in violation of the understanding between Kennedy and Khrushchev which had ended the missile crisis. In August 1970, the Soviets asked Nixon to reaffirm the agreement. Despite his hard line against Castro, Nixon agreed. The process—which began in secret, but quickly leaked—had not been completed when the US deduced that the Soviets were expanding their base at the Cuban port of Cienfuegos in October 1970. A minor confrontation ensued, which was concluded with an understanding that the Soviets would not use Cienfuegos for submarines bearing ballistic missiles. The final round of diplomatic notes, reaffirming the 1962 accord, were exchanged in November. [ 136 ] The election of Marxist candidate Salvador Allende as President of Chile in September 1970 led Nixon to order that Allende not be allowed to take office. Edward Korry , US Ambassador to Chile, told Nixon that he saw no alternative to Allende, and Nixon ruled out American intervention, though he remained willing to assist opponents of Allende who might come forward. With the Chilean armed forces in disarray following the assassination of the Army leader, General René Schneider , Allende took office. [ 137 ] The military regrouped under General Augusto Pinochet , who overthrew Allende in 1973. During the coup, the deposed president died under disputed circumstances, concerning which there have been allegations of American involvement. [ 138 ] Soviet Union Nixon used the improving international environment to address the topic of nuclear peace. Following the announcement of his visit to China, the Nixon administration concluded negotiations for the president to visit the Soviet Union. The president and first lady arrived in Moscow on May 22, 1972 and met with Leonid Brezhnev , the General Secretary of the Communist Party ; Alexei Kosygin , the Chairman of the Council of Ministers ; and Nikolai Podgorny , the head of state , among other leading Soviet officials. [ 139 ] Nixon meets with Brezhnev during the Soviet leader's trip to the US in 1973. Nixon engaged in intense negotiations with Brezhnev. [ 139 ] Out of the summit came agreements for increased trade and two landmark arms control treaties: SALT I , the first comprehensive limitation pact signed by the two superpowers, [ 104 ] and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty , which banned the development of systems designed to intercept incoming missiles. Nixon and Brezhnev proclaimed a new era of "peaceful coexistence A banquet was held that evening at the Kremlin . [ 139 ] Seeking to foster better relations with the United States, both China and the Soviet Union cut back on their diplomatic support for North Vietnam and advised Hanoi to come to terms militarily. [ 140 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] Nixon later described his strategy: I had long believed that an indispensable element of any successful peace initiative in Vietnam was to enlist, if possible, the help of the Soviets and the Chinese. Though rapprochement with China and détente with the Soviet Union were ends in themselves, I also considered them possible means to hasten the end of the war. At worst, Hanoi was bound to feel less confident if Washington was dealing with Moscow and Beijing. At best, if the two major Communist powers decided that they had bigger fish to fry, Hanoi would be pressured into negotiating a settlement we could accept. [ 143 ] Having made considerable progress over the previous two years in US-Soviet relations, Nixon embarked on a second trip to the Soviet Union in 1974. [ 144 ] He arrived in Moscow on June 27 to a welcome ceremony, cheering crowds, and a state dinner at the Grand Kremlin Palace that evening. [ 144 ] Nixon and Brezhnev met in Yalta , where they discussed a proposed mutual defense pact, détente, and MIRVs . While he considered proposing a comprehensive test-ban treaty, Nixon felt he would not have time as president to complete it. [ 144 ] There were no significant breakthroughs in these negotiations. [ 144 ] Middle Eastern policy Nixon meets with President Anwar Sadat of Egypt, June 1974. As part of the Nixon Doctrine that the US would avoid direct combat assistance to allies where possible, instead giving them assistance to defend themselves, the US greatly increased arms sales to the Middle East—particularly Israel, Iran and Saudi Arabia—during the Nixon administration. [ 145 ] The Nixon administration strongly supported Israel, an American ally in the Middle East but the support was not unconditional. Nixon believed that Israel should make peace with its Arab neighbors and that the United States should encourage it. The president believed that—except during the Suez Crisis —the US had failed to intervene with Israel, and should use the leverage of the large US military aid to Israel to urge the parties to the negotiating table. However, the Arab-Israeli conflict was not a major focus of Nixon's attention during his first term—for one thing, he felt that no matter what he did, American Jews would oppose his reelection. [ 146 ] When an Arab coalition led by Egypt and Syria attacked in October 1973, beginning the Yom Kippur War , Israel suffered initial losses. The US took no action for several days, until Nixon ordered an airlift to Israel, taking personal responsibility for any response by Arab nations. Nixon cut through inter-departmental squabbles and bureaucracy to initiate an airlift of American arms. By the time the US and Soviet Union negotiated a truce, Israel had penetrated deep into enemy territory. The war resulted in the 1973 oil crisis , in which Arab nations refused to sell crude oil to the US in retaliation for its support of Israel. [ 147 ] The embargo caused gasoline shortages and rationing in the United States in late 1973, and was eventually ended by the oil-producing nations as peace took hold. [ 148 ] Kissinger played a major role in the settlement, and was also able to reestablish US relations with Egypt for the first time since 1967; Nixon made one of his final international visits as president there in June 1974. [ 149 ] Domestic policy Nixon chats with a future voter at the Washington Senators ' 1969 Opening Day, with Baseball Commissioner Bowie Kuhn (to the right of Nixon), Senators owner Bob Short and Nixon aide Jack Brennan (in uniform). Economy Further information: Nixon Shock and 1970s energy crisis At the time Nixon took office in 1969, inflation was at 4.7 percent—its highest rate since the Korean War. The Great Society had been enacted under Johnson, which, together with the Vietnam War costs, was causing large budget deficits. There was little unemployment, but interest rates were at their highest in a century. [ 150 ] Nixon's major economic goal was to reduce inflation; the most obvious means of doing so was to end the war. [ 150 ] This could not be accomplished overnight, and the US economy continued to struggle through 1970, contributing to a lackluster Republican performance in the midterm congressional elections (Democrats controlled both Houses of Congress throughout Nixon's presidency). [ 151 ] According to political economist Nigel Bowles in his 2011 study of Nixon's economic policies, the new president did little to alter Johnson's policies through the first year of his presidency. [ 152 ] Nixon was far more interested in foreign affairs than domestic policies, but believed that voters tend to focus on their own financial condition, and that economic conditions were a threat to his reelection. As part of his " New Federalism " views, he proposed grants to the states, but these proposals were for the most part lost in the congressional budget process. However, Nixon gained political credit for advocating them. [ 151 ] In 1970, Congress had granted the President the power to impose wage and price freezes, though the Democratic majorities, knowing Nixon had opposed such controls through his career, did not expect Nixon to actually use the authority. [ 152 ] With inflation unresolved by August 1971, and an election year looming, Nixon convened a summit of his economic advisers at Camp David . He then announced temporary wage and price controls, allowed the dollar to float against other currencies, and ended the convertibility of the dollar into gold. [ 153 ] Bowles points out, "by identifying himself with a policy whose purpose was inflation's defeat, Nixon made it difficult for Democratic opponents ... to criticize him. His opponents could offer no alternative policy that was either plausible or believable since the one they favored was one they had designed but which the president had appropriated for himself." [ 152 ] Nixon's policies dampened inflation through 1972, although their aftereffects contributed to inflation during his second term and into the Ford administration. [ 153 ] After he won reelection, Nixon found inflation returning. [ 154 ] He reimposed price controls in June 1973. The price controls became unpopular with the public and businesspeople, who saw powerful labor unions as preferable to the price board bureaucracy. [ 154 ] The controls produced food shortages , as meat disappeared from grocery stores and farmers drowned chickens rather than sell them at a loss. [ 154 ] Despite the failure to control inflation, controls were slowly ended, and on April 30, 1974, their statutory authorization lapsed. [ 154 ] Governmental initiatives and organization Nixon advocated a " New Federalism ", which would devolve power to state and local elected officials, though Congress was hostile to these ideas and enacted few of them. [ 155 ] He eliminated the Cabinet-level United States Post Office Department , which in 1971 became the government-run United States Postal Service . [ 156 ] Nixon was a late convert to the conservation movement . Environmental policy had not been a significant issue in the 1968 election; the candidates were rarely asked for their views on the subject. He saw that the first Earth Day in April 1970 presaged a wave of voter interest on the subject, and sought to use that to his benefit; in June he announced the formation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Nixon broke new ground by discussing environment policy in his State of the Union speech ; other initiatives supported by Nixon included the Clean Air Act of 1970 and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA); the National Environmental Policy Act required environmental impact statements for many Federal projects. [ 157 ] Nixon vetoed the Clean Water Act of 1972—objecting not to the policy goals of the legislation but to the amount of money to be spent on them, which he deemed excessive. After Congress overrode his veto, Nixon impounded the funds he deemed unjustifiable. [ 158 ] In 1971, Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts proposed a plan for universal federally run health insurance, partly motivated by dramatic rises in public and private health care expenditures. In response, Nixon proposed a health care plan which would provide insurance for low-income families, and require that all employees be provided with health care. As this still would have left some forty million people uncovered, Kennedy and the other Democrats declined to support it, and the measure failed, though a Nixon proposal for increased use of health maintenance organizations passed Congress in 1973. [ 159 ] US space program Nixon visits the Apollo 11 astronauts in quarantine aboard USS Hornet . Further information: Space policy of the United States After a nearly decade-long national effort , the United States won the race to land astronauts on the moon on July 20, 1969, with the flight of Apollo 11 . Nixon spoke with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin during their moonwalk. He called the conversation "the most historic phone call ever made from the White House". [ 160 ] Nixon, however, was unwilling to keep funding for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) at the high level seen through the 1960s as NASA prepared to send men to the moon. NASA Administrator Thomas O. Paine drew up ambitious plans for the establishment of a permanent base on the moon by the end of the 1970s and the launch of a manned expedition to Mars as early as 1981. Nixon, however, rejected both proposals. [ 161 ] On May 24, 1972, Nixon approved a five-year cooperative program between NASA and the Soviet space program , culminating in the Apollo–Soyuz Test Project , a joint mission of an American Apollo and a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft in 1975. [ 162 ] Civil rights The Nixon years witnessed the first large-scale integration of public schools in the South. [ 163 ] Nixon sought a middle way between the segregationist Wallace and liberal Democrats, whose support of integration was alienating some Southern whites. [ 164 ] Hopeful of doing well in the South in 1972, he sought to dispose of desegregation as a political issue before then. Soon after his inauguration, he appointed Vice President Agnew to lead a task force, which worked with local leaders—both white and black—to determine how to integrate local schools. Agnew had little interest in the work, and most of it was done by Labor Secretary George Shultz . Federal aid was available, and a meeting with President Nixon was a possible reward for compliant committees. By September 1970, fewer than ten percent of black children were attending segregated schools. By 1971, however, tensions over desegregation surfaced in Northern cities, with angry protests over the busing of children to schools outside their neighborhood to achieve racial balance. Nixon opposed busing personally but enforced court orders requiring its use. [ 165 ] In addition to desegregating public schools, Nixon implemented the Philadelphia Plan in 1970—the first significant federal affirmative action program. [ 166 ] He also endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment after it passed both houses of Congress in 1972 and went to the states for ratification. [ 167 ] Nixon had campaigned as an ERA supporter in 1968, though feminists criticized him for doing little to help the ERA or their cause after his election, though he appointed more women to administration positions than Lyndon Johnson had. [ 168 ] Reelection, Watergate scandal, and resignation Nixon announces the release of edited transcripts of the Watergate tapes, April 29, 1974. 1972 presidential campaign Main article: United States presidential election, 1972 Nixon believed his rise to power had peaked at a moment of political realignment . The Democratic " Solid South " had long been a frustration to Republican ambitions. Goldwater had won several Southern states by opposing the Civil Rights Act of 1964 but had alienated more moderate Southerners. Nixon's efforts to gain Southern support in 1968 were diluted by Wallace's candidacy. Through his first term, he pursued a Southern Strategy with policies, such as his desegregation plans, that would be broadly acceptable among Southern whites, encouraging them to realign with the Republicans in the aftermath of the Civil Rights era . He nominated two Southern conservatives, Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell to the Supreme Court, but neither was confirmed by the Senate. [ 169 ] Nixon meets the public during the 1972 presidential campaign. Nixon entered his name on the New Hampshire primary ballot on January 5, 1972, effectively announcing his candidacy for reelection. [ 170 ] Virtually assured the Republican nomination, [ 171 ] the President had initially expected his Democratic opponent to be Massachusetts Senator Ted Kennedy (brother of the late president), but he was largely removed from contention after the 1969 Chappaquiddick incident . [ 172 ] Instead, Maine Senator Edmund Muskie became the front runner, with South Dakota Senator George McGovern in a close second place. [ 170 ] On June 10, McGovern won the California primary and secured the Democratic nomination. [ 173 ] The following month, Nixon was renominated at the 1972 Republican National Convention . He dismissed the Democratic platform as cowardly and divisive. [ 174 ] McGovern intended to sharply reduce defense spending [ 175 ] and supported amnesty for draft evaders as well as abortion rights . With some of his supporters believed to be in favor of drug legalization, McGovern was perceived as standing for "amnesty, abortion and acid". McGovern was also damaged by his vacillating support for his original running mate, Missouri Senator Thomas Eagleton , dumped from the ticket following revelations that he had received treatment for depression . [ 176 ] [ 177 ] Nixon was ahead in most polls for the entire election cycle, and was reelected on November 7, 1972 in one of the largest landslide election victories in American history . He defeated McGovern with over 60 percent of the popular vote, losing only in Massachusetts and the District of Columbia . [ 178 ] Nixon fields questions at a press conference, October 26, 1973. Watergate Main article: Watergate scandal The term Watergate has come to encompass an array of clandestine and often illegal activities undertaken by members of the Nixon administration. Those activities included " dirty tricks " such as bugging the offices of political opponents and people of whom Nixon or his officials were suspicious. Nixon and his close aides ordered harassment of activist groups and political figures, using the FBI, CIA, and the Internal Revenue Service . The activities became known after five men were caught breaking into Democratic party headquarters at the Watergate complex in Washington, D.C. on June 17, 1972. The Washington Post picked up on the story; reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward relied on an informant known as " Deep Throat "—later revealed to be Mark Felt , associate director at the FBI—to link the men to the Nixon administration. Nixon downplayed the scandal as mere politics, calling news articles biased and misleading. As a series of revelations made it clear that Nixon aides had committed crimes in attempts to sabotage the Democrats and others, senior aides such as White House Counsel John Dean and Chief of Staff H. R. Haldeman faced prosecution. [ 104 ] [ 179 ] [ 180 ] In July 1973, White House aide Alexander Butterfield testified that Nixon had a secret taping system that recorded his conversations and phone calls in the Oval Office. These tapes were subpoenaed by Watergate Special Counsel Archibald Cox . Nixon refused to release them, citing executive privilege . With the White House and Cox at loggerheads, Nixon had Cox fired in October in the " Saturday Night Massacre "; he was replaced by Leon Jaworski . In November, Nixon's lawyers revealed that an audio tape of conversations, held in the White House on June 20, 1972, featured an 18½ minute gap. [ 180 ] Rose Mary Woods , the President's personal secretary, claimed responsibility for the gap, alleging that she had accidentally wiped the section while transcribing the tape, though her tale was widely mocked. The gap, while not conclusive proof of wrongdoing by the President, cast doubt on Nixon's statement that he had been unaware of the cover-up. [ 181 ] A demonstrator demands Nixon's impeachment , October 1973. Though Nixon lost much popular support, even from his own party, he rejected accusations of wrongdoing and vowed to stay in office. [ 180 ] He insisted that he had made mistakes, but had no prior knowledge of the burglary, did not break any laws, and did not learn of the cover-up until early 1973. [ 182 ] On October 10, 1973, Vice President Agnew resigned amid allegations—unrelated to Watergate—of bribery, tax evasion and money laundering from his tenure as Maryland's governor. Nixon chose Gerald Ford , Minority Leader of the House of Representatives , to replace Agnew. [ 183 ] On November 17, 1973, during a televised question and answer session with the press, [ 184 ] Nixon said, People have got to know whether or not their President is a crook. Well, I'm not a crook. I've earned everything I've got. [ 185 ] The legal battle over the tapes continued through early 1974, and in April 1974 Nixon announced the release of 1,200 pages of transcripts of White House conversations between him and his aides. The House Judiciary Committee , opened impeachment hearings against the President on May 9, 1974, which were televised on the major networks. These hearings culminated in votes for articles of impeachment, the first being 27–11 in favor on July 27, 1974 on obstruction of justice . [ 182 ] On July 24, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the full tapes, not just selected transcripts must be released. [ 186 ] Even with support diminished by the continuing series of revelations, Nixon hoped to win through. However, one of the new tapes, recorded soon after the break-in, demonstrated that Nixon had been told of the White House connection to the Watergate burglaries soon after they took place, and had approved plans to thwart the investigation. In a statement accompanying the release of the "Smoking Gun Tape" on August 5, 1974, Nixon accepted blame for misleading the country about when he had been told of the truth behind the Watergate break-in, stating that he had a lapse of memory. [ 187 ] He met with Republican congressional leaders soon after, and was told he faced certain impeachment in the House and had, at most, 15 senators prepared to vote for his acquittal—far fewer than the 34 he needed to avoid removal from office. [ 188 ] Resignation Richard Nixon resigns Resignation speech of President Richard Nixon, delivered August 8, 1974. Problems listening to this file? See media help . In light of his loss of political support and the near certainty of impeachment, Nixon resigned the office of the presidency on August 9, 1974, after addressing the nation on television the previous evening. [ 182 ] The resignation speech was delivered from the Oval Office and was carried live on radio and television. Nixon stated that he was resigning for the good of the country and asked the nation to support the new president, Gerald Ford. Nixon went on to review the accomplishments of his presidency, especially in foreign policy. [ 189 ] He defended his record as president, and stated: Sometimes I have succeeded and sometimes I have failed, but always I have taken heart from what Theodore Roosevelt once said about the man in the arena , "whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errs and comes up short again and again because there is not effort without error and shortcoming, but who does actually strive to do the deed, who knows the great enthusiasms, the great devotions, who spends himself in a worthy cause, who at the best knows in the end the triumphs of high achievements and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly". [ 190 ] Nixon's speech contained no admission of wrongdoing, and was termed "a masterpiece" by Conrad Black , one of his biographers. Black opined that "What was intended to be an unprecedented humiliation for any American president, Nixon converted into a virtual parliamentary acknowledgement of almost blameless insufficiency of legislative support to continue. He left while devoting half his address to a recitation of his accomplishments in office." [ 191 ] The initial response from network commentators was generally favorable, with only Roger Mudd of CBS stating that Nixon had evaded the issue, and had not admitted his role in the cover-up. [ 192 ] Later years and death President Ronald Reagan meets with his three predecessors, Ford, Carter and Nixon at the White House, October 1981; the three former presidents would represent the United States at the funeral of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat . Pardon and illness Following his resignation, the Nixons flew to their home La Casa Pacifica in San Clemente , California. [ 193 ] According to his biographer, Aitken, after his resignation, "Nixon was a soul in torment". [ 194 ] Congress had funded Nixon's transition costs, including some salary expenses, though reducing the appropriation from $850,000 to $200,000. With some of his staff still with him, Nixon was at his desk by 7 a.m.—with little to do. [ 194 ] His former press secretary, Ron Ziegler , sat with him alone for hours each day. [ 195 ] Nixon's resignation had not put an end to the desire among many to see him punished. The Ford White House considered a pardon of Nixon, though it would be unpopular in the country. Nixon, contacted by Ford emissaries, was initially reluctant to accept the pardon, but then agreed to do so. Ford, however, insisted on a statement of contrition; Nixon felt he had not committed any crimes and should not have to issue such a document. Ford eventually agreed, and on September 8, 1974, he granted Nixon a "full, free, and absolute pardon", which ended any possibility of an indictment. Nixon then released a statement: I was wrong in not acting more decisively and more forthrightly in dealing with Watergate, particularly when it reached the stage of judicial proceedings and grew from a political scandal into a national tragedy. No words can describe the depth of my regret and pain at the anguish my mistakes over Watergate have caused the nation and the presidency, a nation I so deeply love, and an institution I so greatly respect. [ 196 ] [ 197 ] In October 1974, Nixon fell ill with phlebitis . Told by his doctors that he could either be operated on or die, a reluctant Nixon chose surgery, and President Ford visited him in the hospital. Nixon was under subpoena for the trial of three of his former aides—Dean, Haldeman, and John Ehrlichman —and The Washington Post , disbelieving his illness, printed a cartoon showing Nixon with a cast on the "wrong foot". Judge John Sirica excused Nixon's presence despite the defendants' objections. [ 198 ] Congress instructed Ford to retain Nixon's presidential papers—beginning a three-decade legal battle over the documents that eventually would be won by the former president and his estate. [ 199 ] Nixon was in the hospital when the 1974 midterm elections were held, and Watergate and the pardon were contributing factors to the Republican loss of 43 seats in the House and three in the Senate. [ 200 ] Return to public life In December 1974, Nixon began planning his comeback despite the considerable ill-will against him in the country. He wrote in his diary, referring to himself and Pat, So be it. We will see it through. We've had tough times before and we can take the tougher ones that we will have to go through now. That is perhaps what we were made for—to be able to take punishment beyond what anyone in this office has had before particularly after leaving office. This is a test of character and we must not fail the test. [ 201 ] Nixon (right) joins Gerald Ford (center) and President Jimmy Carter (left) at the White House for the funeral of former Vice President Hubert Humphrey , 1978. By early 1975, Nixon's health was improving. He maintained an office in a Coast Guard station 300 yards from his home, at first taking a golf cart and later walking the route each day; he mainly worked on his memoirs. [ 202 ] He had hoped to wait before writing his memoirs; the fact that his assets were being eaten away by expenses and lawyer fees compelled him to begin work quickly. [ 203 ] He was handicapped in this work by the end of his transition allowance in February, which compelled him to part with much of his staff, including Ziegler. [ 204 ] In August of that year, he met with British talk-show host and producer David Frost , who paid him $600,000 for a series of sit-down interviews , filmed and aired in 1977. [ 205 ] They began on the topic of foreign policy, recounting the leaders he had known, but the most remembered section of the interviews was that on Watergate. Nixon admitted that he had "let down the country" and that "I brought myself down. I gave them a sword and they stuck it in. And they twisted it with relish. And, I guess, if I'd been in their position, I'd have done the same thing." [ 206 ] The interviews garnered 45–50 million viewers—becoming the most-watched program of their kind in television history. [ 207 ] The interviews helped improve Nixon's financial position—at one point in early 1975 he had only $500 in the bank—as did the sale of his Key Biscayne property to a trust set up by wealthy Nixon friends such as Bebe Rebozo . [ 208 ] In February 1976, Nixon visited China at the personal invitation of Mao. Nixon had wanted to return to China, but chose to wait until after Ford's own visit in 1975. [ 209 ] Nixon remained neutral in the 1976 primary battle between Ford and Reagan—won by Ford in a close fight at the convention in Kansas City , at which Nixon (who had been nominated by five of the previous six conventions) was not mentioned once. Ford lost narrowly in the general election to Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter , which led to suggestions that Ford would have been elected had he not pardoned Nixon. Nixon biographer Black points out that had no pardon been issued, Nixon would likely have been on trial in November 1976, causing a GOP loss by a much greater margin. [ 210 ] The Carter administration had little use for Nixon and blocked his planned trip to Australia, causing the government of Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser to withhold from him an official invitation. [ 211 ] In early 1978, Nixon went to the United Kingdom. He was shunned by American diplomats and by most ministers of the James Callaghan government. He was welcomed, however, by the Leader of the Opposition , Margaret Thatcher , as well as by former prime ministers Lord Home and Sir Harold Wilson , though two other former prime ministers, Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath declined to meet with him. Nixon addressed the Oxford Union regarding Watergate: Some people say I didn't handle it properly and they're right. I screwed it up. Mea culpa . But let's get on to my achievements. You'll be here in the year 2000 and we'll see how I'm regarded then. [ 212 ] Author and elder statesman Nixon speaks with Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping and US President Jimmy Carter at the White House, 1979. In 1978, Nixon published his memoirs, RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon , the first of ten books he was to author in his retirement. [ 193 ] The book was a bestseller and attracted a generally positive critical response. [ 213 ] Nixon journeyed to the White House in 1979, invited by Carter for the state dinner for Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping . Carter had not wanted to invite Nixon, but Deng had stated he would visit Nixon in California if the former president was not invited. Nixon had a private meeting with Deng and visited Beijing again in mid-1979. [ 214 ] In early 1980, the Nixons purchased a New York City townhouse after being rejected by two Manhattan co-ops . [ 215 ] When the former Shah of Iran died in Egypt in July 1980, Nixon defied the State Department, which intended to send no US representative, by attending the funeral. Though Nixon had no official credentials, as a former president he was seen as the American presence at its former ally's funeral. [ 216 ] Nixon supported Ronald Reagan for president in 1980 , making television appearances portraying himself as, in biographer Stephen Ambrose's words, "the senior statesman above the fray". [ 217 ] He wrote guest articles for many publications both during the campaign and after Reagan's victory. [ 218 ] After eighteen months in the New York City townhouse, Nixon and his wife moved in 1981 to Saddle River , New Jersey. [ 193 ] Throughout the 1980s, Nixon maintained an ambitious schedule of speaking engagements and writing, [ 193 ] traveled, and met with many foreign leaders, especially those of Third World countries. He joined former Presidents Ford and Carter as representatives of the United States at the funeral of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat . [ 193 ] On a trip to the Middle East, Nixon made his views known regarding Saudi Arabia and Libya, which attracted significant US media attention; The Washington Post ran stories on Nixon's "rehabilitation". [ 219 ] Nixon journeyed to the Soviet Union in 1986 and on his return sent President Reagan a lengthy memorandum containing foreign policy suggestions and his personal impressions of Mikhail Gorbachev . [ 193 ] Following this trip, Nixon was ranked in a Gallup poll as one of the ten most admired men in the world. [ 220 ] Nixon visits President Bill Clinton in the White House family quarters, March 1993. In 1986, Nixon addressed a convention of newspaper publishers, impressing his audience with his tour d'horizon of the world. [ 221 ] At the time, political pundit Elizabeth Drew wrote, "Even when he was wrong, Nixon still showed that he knew a great deal and had a capacious memory, as well as the capacity to speak with apparent authority, enough to impress people who had little regard for him in earlier times." [ 221 ] Newsweek ran a story on "Nixon's comeback" with the headline "He's back". [ 222 ] On July 19, 1990, the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda , California opened as a private institution with the Nixons in attendance. They were joined by a large crowd of people, including Presidents Ford, Reagan, and George H. W. Bush , as well as their wives, Betty , Nancy , and Barbara . [ 223 ] In January 1991, the former president founded the Nixon Center (today the Center for the National Interest ), a Washington policy think tank and conference center. [ 224 ] Pat Nixon died on June 22, 1993, of emphysema and lung cancer. Her funeral services were held on the grounds of the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace. Former President Nixon was distraught throughout the interment. [ 225 ] Inside the building, he delivered a moving tribute to her. [ 225 ] Death and funeral Main article: Death and funeral of Richard Nixon Five US presidents and their first ladies attend the funeral of Richard Nixon, April 27, 1994. Nixon suffered a severe stroke on April 18, 1994, while preparing to eat dinner in his Park Ridge , New Jersey home. [ 226 ] A blood clot resulting from his heart condition had formed in his upper heart, broken off, and traveled to his brain. He was taken to New York Hospital–Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan , initially alert but unable to speak or to move his right arm or leg. [ 226 ] Damage to the brain caused swelling ( cerebral edema ), and Nixon slipped into a deep coma. He died at 9:08 p.m. on April 22, 1994, with his daughters at his bedside. He was 81 years old. [ 226 ] Nixon's funeral took place on April 27, 1994—the first for an American president since Lyndon B. Johnson 's in 1973, over which Nixon had presided. Eulogists at the Nixon Library ceremony included then-President Bill Clinton , former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger , Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole , California Governor Pete Wilson , and the Reverend Billy Graham . Also in attendance were former Presidents Ford, Carter, Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and their wives. [ 227 ] Richard Nixon rests beside his wife Pat on the grounds of the Nixon Library. He was survived by his two daughters, Tricia and Julie, and four grandchildren. [ 226 ] In keeping with his wishes, his funeral was not a full state funeral , though his body did lie in repose in the Nixon Library lobby from April 26 to the morning of the funeral services. [ 228 ] Mourners waited in line up to eight hours in chilly, wet weather to pay their respects. [ 229 ] At its peak, the line to pass by Nixon's casket was three miles long with an estimated 42,000 people waiting to pay their respects. [ 230 ] John F. Stacks of Time magazine said of Nixon shortly after his death, "An outsize energy and determination drove him on to recover and rebuild after every self-created disaster that he faced. To reclaim a respected place in American public life after his resignation, he kept traveling and thinking and talking to the world's leaders ... and by the time Bill Clinton came to the White House [in 1993], Nixon had virtually cemented his role as an elder statesman. Clinton, whose wife served on the staff of the committee that voted to impeach Nixon, met openly with him and regularly sought his advice." [ 231 ] Tom Wicker of The New York Times noted that Nixon had been equalled only by Franklin Roosevelt in being five times nominated on a major party ticket and, quoting Nixon's 1962 farewell speech, wrote, "Richard Nixon's jowly, beard-shadowed face, the ski-jump nose and the widow's peak, the arms upstretched in the V-sign, had been so often pictured and caricatured, his presence had become such a familiar one in the land, he had been so often in the heat of controversy, that it was hard to realize the nation really would not 'have Nixon to kick around anymore'." [ 232 ] Ambrose said of the reaction to Nixon's death, "To everyone's amazement, except his, he's our beloved elder statesman." [ 233 ] Upon Nixon's death, almost all of the news coverage mentioned Watergate, but for the most part, the coverage was favorable to the former president. The Dallas Morning News stated, "History ultimately should show that despite his flaws, he was one of our most farsighted chief executives." [ 234 ] This offended some; columnist Russell Baker complained of "a group conspiracy to grant him absolution". [ 235 ] Cartoonist Jeff Koterba of the Omaha World-Herald depicted History before a blank canvas, his subject Nixon, as America looks on eagerly. The artist urges his audience to sit down; the work will take some time to complete, as "this portrait is a little more complicated than most". [ 236 ] Legacy Historian and political scientist James MacGregor Burns observed of Nixon, "How can one evaluate such an idiosyncratic president, so brilliant and so morally lacking?" [ 237 ] Nixon's biographers disagree on how he will be perceived by history. According to Ambrose, "Nixon wanted to be judged by what he accomplished. What he will be remembered for is the nightmare he put the country through in his second term and for his resignation." [ 238 ] Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's congressional career, suggests that "he was remarkable among his congressional peers, a success story in a troubled era, one who steered a sensible anti-Communist course against the excess of McCarthy". [ 239 ] Aitken feels that "Nixon, both as a man and as a statesman, has been excessively maligned for his faults and inadequately recognised for his virtues. Yet even in a spirit of historical revisionism, no simple verdict is possible." [ 240 ] The graves of President Richard Nixon (right) and First Lady Pat Nixon Nixon's Southern Strategy is credited by some historians as causing the South to become a Republican stronghold, though others deem economic factors more important to the change. [ 169 ] Throughout his career, he was instrumental in moving his party away from the control of isolationists, and as a congressman was a persuasive advocate of containing Soviet communism. [ 241 ] According to his biographer, Herbert Parmet, "Nixon's role was to steer the Republican party along a middle course, somewhere between the competitive impulses of the Rockefellers, the Goldwaters, and the Reagans." [ 242 ] Nixon is given credit for his stance on domestic affairs, which resulted in the passage and enforcement of environmental and regulatory legislation. Historian Paul Charles Milazzo in his 2011 paper on Nixon and the environment, points to Nixon's creation of the EPA and his enforcement of legislation such as the 1973 Endangered Species Act , stating that "though unsought and unacknowledged, Richard Nixon's environmental legacy is secure." [ 243 ] Nixon saw his policies regarding Vietnam, China, and the Soviets as key to his place in history. [ 145 ] George McGovern , Nixon's onetime opponent, commented in 1983, "President Nixon probably had a more practical approach to the two superpowers, China and the Soviet Union, than any other president since World War II ... With the exception of his inexcusable continuation of the war in Vietnam, Nixon really will get high marks in history." [ 244 ] Political scientist Jussi M. Hanhimäki disagrees, saying Nixon's diplomacy was merely a continuation of the Cold War policy of containment , using diplomatic rather than military means. [ 145 ] Historian Keith W. Olson has written that Nixon left a negative legacy: fundamental mistrust of government with its roots in Vietnam and Watergate. [ 245 ] During the impeachment of Bill Clinton in 1998, both sides tried to use Nixon and Watergate to their advantage: Republicans suggested that Clinton's misconduct had been comparable to Nixon's, while Democrats contended that Nixon's actions had been far more serious than those of the incumbent. [ 246 ] Another legacy, for a time, was a decrease in the power of the presidency as Congress passed restrictive legislation in the wake of Watergate. Olson, however suggests that grants of power to George W. Bush in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks restored the president's power. [ 245 ] Personality and public image Nixon and Elvis Presley in December 1970: "The President & The King" Nixon's career was frequently dogged by his persona and the public's perception of it. Editorial cartoonists and comedians often exaggerated his appearance and mannerisms, to the point where the line between the human and the caricature became increasingly blurred. He was often portrayed with unshaven jowls, slumped shoulders, and a furrowed, sweaty brow. [ 247 ] Nixon had a complex personality, both very secretive and awkward, yet strikingly reflective about himself. He was inclined to distance himself from people and was formal in all aspects, wearing a coat and tie even when home alone. [ 248 ] Nixon biographer Conrad Black described him as being "driven" though also "uneasy with himself in some ways". [ 249 ] According to Black, Nixon "thought that he was doomed to be traduced, double-crossed, unjustly harassed, misunderstood, underappreciated, and subjected to the trials of Job , but that by the application of his mighty will, tenacity, and diligence, he would ultimately prevail". [ 250 ] Biographer Elizabeth Drew summarized Nixon as a "smart, talented man, but most peculiar and haunted of presidents". [ 251 ] In his account of the Nixon presidency, author Richard Reeves described Nixon as "a strange man of uncomfortable shyness who functioned best, alone with his thoughts". [ 252 ] Nixon's presidency was doomed by his personality, Reeves argues: "He assumed the worst in people and he brought out the worst in them ... He clung to the idea of being 'tough'. He thought that was what had brought him to the edge of greatness. But that was what betrayed him. He could not open himself to other men and he could not open himself to greatness." [ 253 ] Nixon with Bebe Rebozo (left) and FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover . The three men relax before dinner, Key Biscayne, FL, December 1971. In October 1999, a volume of 1971 White House audio tapes was released that contained statements by Nixon deemed derogatory toward Jews. [ 254 ] In one conversation with H. R. Haldeman , Nixon said that Washington was "full of Jews" and that "most Jews are disloyal," making exceptions for some of his top aides. [ 255 ] He then added, "But, Bob, generally speaking, you can't trust the bastards. They turn on you. Am I wrong or right?" [ 255 ] Elsewhere in the 1971 recordings, Nixon denies being anti-Semitic, saying, "If anybody who's been in this chair ever had reason to be anti-Semitic, I did ... And I'm not, you know what I mean?" [ 255 ] Nixon believed that putting distance between himself and other people was necessary for him as he advanced in his political career and became president. Even Bebe Rebozo, by some accounts his closest friend, did not call him by his first name. Nixon stated of this, "Even with close friends. I don't believe in letting your hair down, confiding this and that and the other thing—saying, 'Gee, I couldn't sleep' ... I believe you should keep your troubles to yourself. That's just the way I am. Some people are different. Some people think it's good therapy to sit with a close friend and, you know, just spill your guts ... [and] reveal their inner psyche—whether they were breast-fed or bottle-fed. Not me. No way." [ 256 ] When told that most Americans, even at the end of his career, did not feel they knew him, Nixon replied, "Yeah, it's true. And it's not necessary for them to know." [ 256 ] See also conservatism  portal Murray Chotiner , Nixon's campaign manager and aide. Nixon in China , 1987 opera by John Adams . Notes ^ Richard M. Nixon Birthplace . National Park Service . Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ Ferris , p. 209. ^ Nixon Library, Childhood . ^ Aitken , p. 11. ^ Aitken , p. 12. ^ Aitken , p. 21. ^ Ambrose 1987 , p. 41. ^ Aitken , p. 27. ^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 56–57. ^ Black , p. 16. ^ Morris , p. 89. ^ Black , pp. 17–19. ^ Morris , p. 91. ^ Morris , p. 92. ^ a b Aitken , p. 28. ^ Black , pp. 20–23. ^ Black , pp. 23–24. ^ Gellman , p. 15. ^ Black , pp. 24–25. ^ Ambrose 1987 , p. 61. ^ Aitken , pp. 58–63. ^ a b c d e Nixon Library, Student & Sailor . ^ a b Ambrose 1987 , pp. 33–34. ^ Aitken , p. 67. ^ Parmet , p. 81. ^ Blythe , p. 7. ^ Aitken , p. 76. ^ Aitken , pp. 79–82. ^ Morris , p. 193. ^ Black , p. 44. ^ Black , p. 43. ^ Nixon 1978 , p. 23. ^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 93, 99. ^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 100–101. ^ Nixon Library, Nixon Family . ^ Morris , pp. 124–126. ^ Aitken , pp. 96–97. ^ Commander Richard M. Nixon, USNR . Naval Historical Center, United States Navy. August 7, 2006. Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ Black , pp. 58–60. ^ Black , p. 60. ^ a b Black , p. 62. ^ Aitken , p. 112. ^ Black , pp. 62–63. ^ Parmet , pp. 91–96. ^ Gellman , pp. 27–28. ^ Parmet , pp. 111–113. ^ Gellman , p. 82. ^ Gellman , pp. 105–107, 125–126. ^ Morris , p. 365. ^ Black , pp. 129–135. ^ Gellman , pp. 239–241. ^ Morris , p. 381. ^ Nixon Library, Congressman . ^ Gellman , p. 282. ^ Morris , p. 535. ^ Gellman , pp. 296–297. ^ Gellman , p. 304. ^ Gellman , p. 310. ^ Morris , p. 581. ^ Gellman , p. 335. ^ a b Nixon Library, Senator . ^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 211, 311–312. ^ a b Black , p. 178. ^ Gellman , pp. 440–441. ^ Aitken , pp. 205–206. ^ a b Aitken , pp. 222–223. ^ a b c Aitken , pp. 210–217. ^ Thompson, John. Political Scandal . Cambridge: Polity, 2000, p. 291. ISBN 978-0-7456-2550-8 Retrieved July 24, 2011. ^ Aitken , p. 218. ^ Morris , p. 846. ^ Aitken , pp. 225–227. ^ Ambrose 1987 , p. 342. ^ Gellman, Irwin. "The Richard Nixon vice presidency: Research without the Nixon manuscripts" in Small , pp. 102–120. ^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 357–358. ^ Aitken , pp. 256–258. ^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 375–376. ^ Aitken , pp. 237–241. ^ Parmet , p. 294. ^ Black , pp. 349–352. ^ Black , p. 355. ^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 465–469. ^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 469–479. ^ Ambrose 1987 , p. 463. ^ Ambrose 1987 , pp. 521–525. ^ Kennedy Wins 1960 Presidential Election 1960 Year In Review , United Press International . Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ a b c d e f g h i Nixon Library, Vice President . ^ Allen, Erika Tyler. The Kennedy-Nixon Presidential Debates, 1960 . Museum of Broadcast Communications. Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ Steel, Ronald . "The World: New Chapter, Old Debate; Would Kennedy Have Quit Vietnam?" The New York Times , May 25, 2003. Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ Foner , p. 843. ^ Carlson, Peter. "Another Race to the Finish" . The Washington Post , November 17, 2000, p. A01. Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ Black , p. 431. ^ Black , pp. 432–433. ^ Aitken , pp. 304–305. ^ a b Ambrose 1987 , p. 673. ^ Smith, Howard K. The Museum of Broadcast Communications. Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ Black , p. 446. ^ Aitken , pp. 297, 321. ^ Aitken , pp. 321–322. ^ Aitken , pp. 323–326. ^ a b Parmet , p. 502. ^ Morris , pp. 410–411. ^ Parmet , pp. 503–508. ^ Parmet , p. 509. ^ a b c d e f g Nixon Library, President . ^ Morrow, Lance. "Naysayer to the nattering nabobs" . Time , September 30, 1996. Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ a b Black , pp. 513–514. ^ Black , p. 550. ^ a b Schulzinger , p. 413. ^ Black , p. 558. ^ Evans & Novak , pp. 33–34. ^ 1968 Presidential Election . "1968 Year in Review", United Press International . Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ Black , pp. 567–68. ^ Frick , p. 189. ^ Nixon Becomes President . 1969 Year in Review , United Press International . Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ a b Foreign Affairs . American President: Richard Milhous Nixon (1913–1994) , Miller Center for Public Affairs, University of Virginia . Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ Ambrose 1989 , p. 453. ^ Goh, Evelyn. "The China card" in Small , pp. 425–443. ^ Black , p. 778. ^ a b c d e The Nixon Visit – (February 21–28, 1972) . Public Broadcasting Service . Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ a b c Black , pp. 780–782. ^ Ambrose 1989 , p. 516. ^ Dallek , p. 300. ^ Black , p. 569. ^ Black , p. 591. ^ Kiernan, Ben ; Taylor Owen (October 2006). "Bombs over Cambodia" . The Walrus . http://www.yale.edu/cgp/Walrus_CambodiaBombing_OCT06.pdf . Retrieved 29 January 2012 . ^ Ambrose 1989 , pp. 281–283. ^ a b "Again, the Credibility Gap?" . Time , April 5, 1971. Retrieved July 29, 2011. ^ 8,000 Move Into Cambodia , St. Peterburg Independent (now The Evening Independent), AP (Saigon), May 1, 1970, page 20-A. ^ Before The Fall: An Insider View of the Pre-Watergate White House, with a 2005 Preface by the Author , William Safire, Originally published: Garden City, N.Y. : Doubleday, 1975 (new material 2005), pages 205–209. ^ Nixon Up Early, See Protesters , UPI, Beaver County Times [Pennsylvania], Saturday, May 9, 1970, page one [presumably late edition]. ^ Black , pp. 675–676. ^ Ambrose 1989 , pp. 446–448. ^ Evans, Thomas W. "The All-Volunteer Army After Twenty Years: Recruiting in the Modern Era" . Sam Houston State University, 1993. Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ Ambrose 1991 , pp. 53–55. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 473. ^ Ambrose 1989 , pp. 379–383. ^ Black , pp. 689–690. ^ Black , pp. 920–921. ^ a b c 1972: President Nixon arrives in Moscow . British Broadcasting Corporation , May 22, 1972. Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ Gaddis , pp. 294, 299. ^ Guan , pp. 61, 69, 77–79. ^ Zhai , p. 136. ^ Nixon 1985 , pp. 105–106. ^ a b c d Black , p. 963. ^ a b c Hanhimäki, Jussi M. "Foreign Policy Overview" in Small , pp. 345–361. ^ Black , pp. 583–585. In 1972, Nixon did more than double his percentage of the Jewish vote, from 17 percent to 35 percent. Merkley, Paul Charles. American Presidents, Religion, and Israel: the Heirs of Cyrus . Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2004, p. 68. ISBN 978-0-275-98340-6 . Retrieved July 13, 2011. ^ Black , pp. 923–928. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 311. ^ Black , pp. 951–52, 959. ^ a b Ambrose 1989 , pp. 225–226. ^ a b Ambrose 1989 , pp. 431–432. ^ a b c Bowles, Nigel. "Economic Policy" in Small , pp. 235–251. ^ a b Aitken , pp. 399–400. ^ a b c d Hetzel , p. 92. ^ Aitken , p. 395. ^ Postage rates for periodicals: A narrative history . United States Postal Service . Retrieved August 6, 2011. ^ Aitken , pp. 397–398. ^ Aitken , p. 396. ^ Patel, Kant and Rushefsky, Mark E. Health Care Politics and Policy in America . Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe. 2006. p. 47. Third edition. ISBN 978-0-7656-1478-0 . Retrieved September 23, 2011. ^ Parmet , p. 563. ^ Hardin, Daniel. Just another Apollo? Part two . The Space Review , November 28, 2005. Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ The Partnership – ch6-11 . National Aeronautics and Space Administration . Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ Boger , p. 6. ^ Sabia, Joseph J. Why Richard Nixon Deserves to Be Remembered Along with Brown . History News Network, May 31, 2004. Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ Parmet , pp. 595–597, 603. ^ Delaney, Paul. "Nixon Plan for Negro Construction Jobs Is Lagging" . The New York Times , July 20, 1970, p. 1. ^ Frum , p. 246. ^ Richard M. Nixon . American Experience: The Presidents , Public Broadcasting Service . Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ a b Mason, Robert "Political realignment" in Small , pp. 252–269. ^ a b Black , p. 766. ^ Black , p. 795. ^ Black , p. 617. ^ Black , p. 816. ^ Black , p. 834. ^ White , p. 123. ^ "Behavior: Evaluating Eagleton" . Time , August 14, 1972. Retrieved July 23, 2011. ^ "Democrats: The long journey to disaster" . Time , November 20, 1972. Retrieved July 23, 2011. ^ Parmet , p. 629. ^ "The Post Investigates" . The Washington Post . Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ a b c The government acts . The Washington Post . Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ Aitken , pp. 511–512. ^ a b c Nixon resigns . The Washington Post . Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ Ambrose 1989 , pp. 231–232, 239. ^ Frum , p. 26. ^ Kilpatrick, Carroll. "Nixon tells editors, 'I'm not a crook'". The Washington Post , November 18, 1973. Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ Ambrose 1991 , pp. 394–395. ^ Ambrose 1991 , pp. 414–416. ^ Black , p. 978. ^ Ambrose 1991 , pp. 435–436. ^ President Nixon's Resignation Speech . Public Broadcasting Service . Retrieved July 15, 2011. ^ Black , p. 983. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 437. ^ a b c d e f Nixon Library, Post Presidency . ^ a b Aitken , p. 529. ^ Aitken , pp. 529–530. ^ Aitken , p. 532. ^ Black , p. 990. ^ Aitken , pp. 533–534. ^ Black , pp. 994, 999. ^ Black , p. 998. ^ Aitken , p. 535. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 481. ^ Aitken , pp. 537, 539. ^ Black , p. 1000. ^ Black , p. 1004. ^ Drew , p. 138. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 512. ^ Aitken , pp. 539–540. ^ Black , p. 1005. ^ Black , pp. 1009–1010. ^ Aitken , p. 543. ^ Aitken , pp. 546–547. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 525. ^ Ambrose 1991 , pp. 524–525. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 528. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 533. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 534. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 540. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 545. ^ Drew , p. 142. ^ a b Drew , p. 144. ^ Aitken , pp. 561–562. ^ Aitken , pp. 565–568. ^ Black , pp. 1045–1046. ^ a b Black , pp. 1049–1050. ^ a b c d Weil, Martin; Randolph, Eleanor. "Richard M. Nixon, 37th President, dies" . The Washington Post , April 23, 1994, page A01. Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ Black , pp. 1051–1053. ^ Reagan funeral: Schedule of events . BBC , June 11, 2004. Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ "Mourners pay last respects to Nixon" . The Deseret News , April 27, 1994, p. 1. Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ Frick , p. 206. ^ Stacks, John F. "Richard Nixon: Victory in Defeat" . Time , May 2, 1994. Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ Wicker, Tom . "From afar: An indomitable man, an incurable loneliness" . The New York Times , April 24, 1994. Retrieved August 7, 2011. ^ Sawhill, Ray. "The Fall and Rise of an American President" . Opera News , February 2011. Retrieved July 16, 2011. ^ Frick , pp. 205–206. ^ Frick , pp. 204–205. ^ Frick , p. 210. ^ Skidmore, Max J. "Ranking and Evaluating Presidents: The Case of Theodore Roosevelt" in White House Studies , volume 1, issue 4 (2001), p. 495. ^ Ambrose 1991 , p. 592. ^ Gellman , p. 460. ^ Aitken , p. 577. ^ Black , p. 1053. ^ Parmet , p. viii. ^ Milazzo, Paul Charles. "Nixon and the Environment" in Small , pp. 270–291. ^ Greider, William. "The McGovern factor". Rolling Stone , November 10, 1983, p. 13. ^ a b Olson, Keith W. "Watergate" in Small , pp. 481–496. ^ Frick , pp. 211–214. ^ Reeves , pp. 281–283. ^ Drew , p. 150. ^ Black , p. 574. ^ Black , p. 700. ^ Drew , p. 151. ^ Reeves , p. 12. ^ Reeves , p. 13. ^ "New tapes reveal depth of Nixon's anti-Semitism" . The Washington Post , October 6, 1999. Retrieved April 4, 2011. ^ a b c Noah, Timothy . "Nixon: I Am Not an Anti-Semite" . Slate , October 7, 1999. Retrieved July 17, 2011. ^ a b Greene, Bob . "What Nixon's best friend couldn't buy" . Jewish World Review , April 8, 2002. Retrieved July 16, 2011. Bibliography Aitken, Jonathan (1996). Nixon: A Life . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing. ISBN 978-0-89526-720-7 . Ambrose, Stephen E. (1987). Nixon: The Education of a Politician 1913–1962 . New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-52836-2 . Ambrose, Stephen E. (1989). Nixon: The Triumph of a Politician 1962–1972 . New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-72506-8 . Ambrose, Stephen E. (1991). Nixon: Ruin and Recovery 1973–1990 . New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-69188-2 . Black, Conrad (2007). Richard M. Nixon: A Life in Full . New York: PublicAffairs Books. ISBN 978-1-58648-519-1 . Blythe, Will (2006). To Hate Like This is to be Happy Forever . New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0-06-074023-8 . Boger, John Charles (2005). School Resegregation: Must the South Turn Back? . Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-5613-0 . Dallek, Robert (2007). Nixon and Kissinger: Partners in Power . New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-072230-2 . Drew, Elizabeth (2007). Richard M. Nixon . The American Presidents Series. New York: Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-6963-1 . Evans, Rowland; Novak, Robert (1971). Nixon in the White House: The Frustration of Power . New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-394-46273-8 . Ferris, Gary W. (1999). Presidential Places: A Guide to the Historic Sites of the U.S. Presidents . Winston Salem, N.C.: John F. Blair. ISBN 978-0-89587-176-3 . Foner, Eric (2006). Give Me Liberty!: An American History . 2 . New York: W. W. Norton & Co. ISBN 978-0-393-92784-9 . Frick, Daniel (2008). Reinventing Richard Nixon . Lawrence, Kans.: University of Kansas Press. ISBN 978-0-7006-1599-5 . Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s . New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04195-4 . Gaddis, John Lewis (1982). Strategies of Containment: A Critical Appraisal of Postwar American National Security Policy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-503097-6 . Gellman, Irwin (1999). The Contender . New York: The Free Press. ISBN 978-1-4165-7255-8 . Guan, Ang Cheng (2003). Ending the Vietnam War: The Vietnamese Communists' Perspective . Florence, Ky.: RoutledgeCurzon. ISBN 978-0-415-40619-2 . Hetzel, Robert L. (2008). The Monetary Policy of the Federal Reserve . New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88132-6 . Morris, Roger (1990). Richard Milhous Nixon: The Rise of an American Politician . New York: Henry Holt & Co. ISBN 978-0-8050-1834-9 . http://books.google.com/?id=Uw8_HAAACAAJ . Nixon, Richard (1978). RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon . New York: Grosset & Dunlap. ISBN 978-0-448-14374-3 . Nixon, Richard (1985). No More Vietnams . Westminster, Md.: Arbor House Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-87795-668-6 . Parmet, Herbert S. (1990). Richard Nixon and His America . Boston: Little, Brown & Co. ISBN 978-0-316-69232-8 . Reeves, Richard (2001). President Nixon: Alone in the White House . New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-80231-2 . Small, Melvin, ed. (2011). A Companion to Richard M. Nixon . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4443-3017-5 . Schulzinger, Robert D. (2003). A Companion to American Foreign Relations . Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-4986-0 . White, Theodore H. (1973). The Making of the President 1972 . New York: Antheneum. ISBN 978-0-689-10553-1 . Zhai, Qiang (2000). China and the Vietnam Wars, 1950–1975 . Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-4842-5 . Nixon Library "Childhood" . The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum . http://www.nixonlibrary.gov/thelife/childhood.php . Retrieved July 16, 2011 . "A Student & Sailor" . The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum . http://www.nixonlibrary.gov/thelife/astudentandsailor.php . Retrieved July 16, 2011 . "The Nixon Family" . The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum . http://www.nixonlibrary.gov/thelife/thenixonfamily.php . Retrieved July 16, 2011 . "The Congressman" . The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum . http://www.nixonlibrary.gov/thelife/apolitician/thecongressman.php . Retrieved July 17, 2011 . "The Senator" . The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum . http://www.nixonlibrary.gov/thelife/apolitician/thesenator.php . Retrieved July 17, 2011 . "The Vice President" . The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum . http://www.nixonlibrary.gov/thelife/apolitician/thevicepresident.php . Retrieved July 17, 2011 . "The President" . The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum . http://www.nixonlibrary.gov/thelife/apolitician/thepresident/ . Retrieved July 17, 2011 . "Post Presidency" . The Life . Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum . http://www.nixonlibrary.gov/thelife/postpresidency.php . Retrieved March 5, 2012 . External links Find more about Richard Nixon on Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions and translations from Wiktionary Images and media from Commons Learning resources from Wikiversity News stories from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Richard Nixon Foundation The Nixon Center, Washington, D.C. Richard Nixon Presidential Library White House biography Richard Nixon: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress The Watergate Tapes Nixon's will Appearances on C-SPAN Richard Nixon at C-SPAN 's American Presidents: Life Portraits Richard Nixon at the Internet Movie Database Richard Nixon at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Works by or about Richard Nixon in libraries ( WorldCat catalog) Works by Richard Nixon at Project Gutenberg Richard Nixon collected news and commentary at The New York Times The Nixon–Presley Meeting at The National Security Archive Titles and Succession United States House of Representatives Preceded by Jerry Voorhis Member of the House of Representatives from California's 12th congressional district 1947–1950 Succeeded by Patrick Hillings United States Senate Preceded by Sheridan Downey United States Senator (Class 3) from California 1950–1953 Served alongside: William Knowland Succeeded by Thomas Kuchel Party political offices Preceded by Earl Warren Republican nominee for Vice President of the United States 1952 , 1956 Succeeded by Henry Lodge Preceded by Dwight Eisenhower Republican nominee for President of the United States 1960 Succeeded by Barry Goldwater Preceded by William Knowland Republican nominee for Governor of California 1962 Succeeded by Ronald Reagan Preceded by Barry Goldwater Republican nominee for President of the United States 1968 , 1972 Succeeded by Gerald Ford Political offices Preceded by Alben Barkley Vice President of the United States 1953–1961 Succeeded by Lyndon Johnson Preceded by Lyndon Johnson President of the United States 1969–1974 Succeeded by Gerald Ford Honorary titles Preceded by Lyndon Johnson Oldest living President of the United States 1973–1981 Succeeded by Ronald Reagan Articles Related to Richard Nixon v t e Richard Nixon Life and politics Birthplace and boyhood home Checkers speech Kitchen Debate Nixon Presidential library Nixon Center " La Casa Pacifica " Death and funeral Presidency Economic policies Vietnam War " Peace With Honor " Silent majority Cold War period Nixon Doctrine " Bring Us Together " Visit to China Détente Linkage Watergate Resignation Judicial appointments Popular culture Nixon in China (opera) Nixon Frost/Nixon Nixon goes to China (phrase) Nixon in film and TV Books Six Crises RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon (autobiography) No More Vietnams Biographical works Elections 1946 / 1948 ( House ) 1950 ( Senate ) 1952 / 1956 ( Vice Presidency ) 1962 ( Governor ) 1960 / 1968 / 1972 ( Presidency ) Family Thelma "Pat" Ryan Nixon (wife) Tricia Nixon Cox (daughter) Julie Nixon Eisenhower (daughter) Frank Nixon (father) Hannah Nixon (mother) v t e Presidents of the United States George Washington John Adams Thomas Jefferson James Madison James Monroe John Quincy Adams Andrew Jackson Martin Van Buren William Henry Harrison John Tyler James K. Polk Zachary Taylor Millard Fillmore Franklin Pierce James Buchanan Abraham Lincoln Andrew Johnson Ulysses S. Grant Rutherford B. Hayes James A. Garfield Chester A. Arthur Grover Cleveland Benjamin Harrison Grover Cleveland William McKinley Theodore Roosevelt William Howard Taft Woodrow Wilson Warren G. Harding Calvin Coolidge Herbert Hoover Franklin D. Roosevelt Harry S. Truman Dwight D. Eisenhower John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Richard Nixon Gerald Ford Jimmy Carter Ronald Reagan George H. W. Bush Bill Clinton George W. Bush Barack Obama v t e Vice Presidents of the United States John Adams Thomas Jefferson Aaron Burr George Clinton Elbridge Gerry Daniel D. Tompkins John C. Calhoun Martin Van Buren Richard Mentor Johnson John Tyler George M. Dallas Millard Fillmore William R. King John C. Breckinridge Hannibal Hamlin Andrew Johnson Schuyler Colfax Henry Wilson William A. Wheeler Chester A. Arthur Thomas A. Hendricks Levi P. Morton Adlai Stevenson I Garret Hobart Theodore Roosevelt Charles W. Fairbanks James S. Sherman Thomas R. Marshall Calvin Coolidge Charles G. Dawes Charles Curtis John Nance Garner Henry A. Wallace Harry S. Truman Alben W. Barkley Richard Nixon Lyndon B. Johnson Hubert Humphrey Spiro Agnew Gerald Ford Nelson Rockefeller Walter Mondale George H. W. Bush Dan Quayle Al Gore Dick Cheney Joe Biden v t e Cabinet of President Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961) Vice President Richard Nixon (1953–1961) Secretary of State John Foster Dulles (1953–1959) Christian A. Herter (1959–1961) Secretary of Defense Charles E. Wilson (1953–1957) Neil H. McElroy (1957–1959) Thomas S. Gates, Jr. (1959–1961) Secretary of the Treasury George M. Humphrey (1953–1957) Robert Bernard Anderson (1957–1961) Attorney General Herbert Brownell, Jr. (1953–1957) William P. Rogers (1957–1961) Postmaster General Arthur Summerfield (1953–1961) Secretary of the Interior Douglas McKay (1953–1956) Fred Andrew Seaton (1956–1961) Secretary of the Agriculture Ezra Taft Benson (1953–1961) Secretary of Commerce Sinclair Weeks (1953–1958) Lewis Strauss (1958–1959) Frederick H. Mueller (1959–1961) Secretary of Labor Martin P. Durkin (1953) James P. Mitchell (1953–1961) Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Oveta Culp Hobby (1953–1955) Marion B. Folsom (1955–1958) Arthur S. Flemming (1958–1961) v t e Republican Party Chairpersons of the RNC Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. B. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martinez Duncan Steele Priebus Presidential tickets Frémont / Dayton Lincoln / Hamlin Lincoln / Johnson Grant / Colfax Grant / Wilson Hayes / Wheeler Garfield / Arthur Blaine / Logan Harrison / Morton Harrison / Reid McKinley / Hobart McKinley / Roosevelt Roosevelt / Fairbanks Taft / Sherman / Butler Hughes / Fairbanks Harding / Coolidge Coolidge / Dawes Hoover / Curtis Landon / Knox Willkie / McNary Dewey / Bricker Dewey / Warren Eisenhower / Nixon Nixon / Lodge Goldwater / Miller Nixon / Agnew Ford / Dole Reagan / G. H. W. Bush G. H. W. Bush / Quayle Dole / Kemp G. W. Bush / Cheney McCain / Palin Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Conventions (List) 1856 (Philadelphia) 1860 (Chicago) 1864 (Baltimore) 1868 (Chicago) 1872 (Philadelphia) 1876 (Cincinnati) 1880 (Chicago) 1884 (Chicago) 1888 (Chicago) 1892 (Minneapolis) 1896 (Saint Louis) 1900 (Philadelphia) 1904 (Chicago) 1908 (Chicago) 1912 (Chicago) 1916 (Chicago) 1920 (Chicago) 1924 (Cleveland) 1928 (Kansas City) 1932 (Chicago) 1936 (Cleveland) 1940 (Philadelphia) 1944 (Chicago) 1948 (Philadelphia) 1952 (Chicago) 1956 (San Francisco) 1960 (Chicago) 1964 (San Francisco) 1968 (Miami Beach) 1972 (Miami Beach) 1976 (Kansas City) 1980 (Detroit) 1984 (Dallas) 1988 (New Orleans) 1992 (Houston) 1996 (San Diego) 2000 (Philadelphia) 2004 (New York) 2008 (St. Paul) 2012 (Tampa) Affiliated organizations College Republicans Congressional Hispanic Conference International Democrat Union Log Cabin Republicans National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Conference of the United States House of Representatives Republican Conference of the United States Senate Republican Governors Association Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Liberty Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican National Coalition for Life Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republican Study Committee Republicans Abroad Republicans for Environmental Protection The Ripon Society Teenage Republicans The Wish List Young Republicans Related articles History 2009 chairmanship election 2011 chairmanship election Bibliography Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism Portal v t e United States Senators from California Class 1 Frémont Weller Broderick Haun Latham Conness Casserly Hager Booth Miller Hearst Williams Hearst Felton White Bard Flint Works Johnson Knowland Engle Salinger Murphy Tunney Hayakawa Wilson Seymour Feinstein Class 3 Gwin McDougall Cole Sargent Farley Stanford Perkins Phelan Shortridge McAdoo Storke Downey Nixon Kuchel Cranston Boxer v t e United States presidential election, 1952 Republican Party Convention · Primaries Nominee : Dwight D. Eisenhower VP Nominee : Richard Nixon Candidiates : Riley A. Bender · Robert Taft · Harold Stassen · Earl Warren Democratic Party Convention · Primaries Nominee: Adlai Stevenson VP Nominee: John Sparkman Candidates : Alben W. Barkley · Paul A. Dever · W. Averell Harriman · Hubert Humphrey · Estes Kefauver · Robert S. Kerr · George Theodore Mickelson · Richard Russell, Jr. Third party and independent candidates Prohibition Party Nominee : Stuart Hamblen VP Nominee : Enoch A. Holtwick Progressive Party Nominee : Vincent Hallinan VP Nominee : Charlotta Bass Socialist Labor Party Nominee : Eric Hass Socialist Party of America Nominee : Darlington Hoopes VP Nominee : Samuel H. Friedman Socialist Workers Party Nominee : Farrell Dobbs Independents and other candidates: Edward Longstreet Bodin · Henry B. Krajewski Other 1952 elections : House · Senate v t e United States presidential election, 1956 Republican Party Convention · Primaries Nominee : Dwight D. Eisenhower VP Nominee : Richard Nixon Democratic Party Convention · Primaries Nominee : Adlai Stevenson VP Nominee : Estes Kefauver Candidates : John S. Battle · Happy Chandler · James C. Davis · William Averell Harriman · Lyndon B. Johnson · Frank Lausche · George Bell Timmerman, Jr. Third party and independent candidates American Vegetarian Party Nominee : Herbert M. Shelton VP Nominee : Symon Gould Prohibition Party Nominee : Enoch A. Holtwick VP Nominee : Herbert C. Holdridge Socialist Labor Party Nominee : Eric Hass VP Nominee : Georgia Cozzini Socialist Party of America Nominee : Darlington Hoopes VP Nominee : Samuel H. Friedman Socialist Workers Party Nominee : Farrell Dobbs Independents and other candidates: T. Coleman Andrews · Gerald L. K. Smith Other 1956 elections : House · Senate v t e United States presidential election, 1960 Democratic Party Convention Primaries Nominee John F. Kennedy VP nominee Lyndon B. Johnson Candidates Ross Barnett Pat Brown Michael DiSalle Paul C. Fisher Hubert Humphrey Lyndon B. Johnson George H. McLain Robert B. Meyner Wayne Morse Albert S. Porter Adlai Stevenson George Smathers Stuart Symington Republican Party Convention Primaries Nominee Richard Nixon VP nominee Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. Candidiates Barry Goldwater Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. James M. Lloyd Nelson Rockefeller Third party and independent candidates American Vegetarian Party Nominee Symon Gould National States' Rights Party Nominee Orval Faubus VP nominee J. B. Stoner Prohibition Party Nominee Rutherford Decker VP nominee E. Harold Munn Socialist Labor Party Nominee Eric Hass VP nominee Georgia Cozzini Socialist Workers Party Nominee Farrell Dobbs Independents and other candidates Harry F. Byrd Merritt B. Curtis Lar Daly George Lincoln Rockwell Charles L. Sullivan Other 1960 elections: House Senate v t e United States presidential election, 1968 Republican Party Convention · Primaries Nominee: Richard Nixon ( campaign ) VP Nominee: Spiro Agnew Candidiates : Frank Carlson · Clifford Case · Hiram L. Fong · John Lindsay · Ronald Reagan · Jim Rhodes · Nelson Rockefeller · Winthrop Rockefeller · George W. Romney · ( campaign ) · Harold Stassen · John A. Volpe Democratic Party Convention · Primaries Nominee: Hubert Humphrey ( campaign ) VP Nominee: Edmund Muskie Candidates : Roger D. Branigin · John G. Crommelin · Paul C. Fisher · Lyndon B. Johnson · Robert F. Kennedy ( campaign ) · Thomas C. Lynch · Eugene McCarthy ( campaign ) · George McGovern · Dan K. Moore · Channing E. Phillips · George Smathers · Stephen M. Young American Independent Party Nominee : George Wallace ( campaign ) VP Nominee : Curtis LeMay Other Third party and independent candidates Communist Party USA Nominee : Charlene Mitchell VP Nominee : Michael Zagarell Peace and Freedom Party Nominee : Eldridge Cleaver VP Nominee : Douglas Fitzgerald Dowd Prohibition Party Nominee : E. Harold Munn Socialist Labor Party Nominee : Henning A. Blomen Socialist Workers Party Nominee : Fred Halstead VP Nominee : Paul Boutelle Independents and other candidates: Dick Gregory Other 1968 elections : House · Senate v t e United States presidential election, 1972 Republican Party Convention · Primaries Nominee: Richard Nixon VP Nominee: Spiro Agnew Candidiates : John M. Ashbrook · Pete McCloskey Democratic Party Convention · Primaries Nominee: George McGovern VP Nominee: Sargent Shriver Candidates: Shirley Chisholm · Walter Fauntroy · Fred R. Harris · Vance Hartke · Wayne Hays · Hubert Humphrey · Henry M. Jackson · John Lindsay · Eugene McCarthy · Wilbur Mills · Patsy Mink · Edmund Muskie · Terry Sanford · George Wallace · Sam Yorty Third party and independent candidates American Independent Party Nominee : John G. Schmitz VP Nominee : Thomas J. Anderson Communist Party USA Nominee : Gus Hall VP Nominee : Jarvis Tyner Libertarian Party Nominee : John Hospers VP Nominee : Tonie Nathan People's Party Nominee : Benjamin Spock VP Nominee : Julius Hobson Prohibition Party Nominee : E. Harold Munn Socialist Labor Party Nominee : Louis Fisher Socialist Workers Party Nominee : Linda Jenness · Alternate nominee : Evelyn Reed VP Nominee : Andrew Pulley Independent Gabriel Green Other 1972 elections : House · Senate v t e Time Persons of the Year Mohammad Mosaddegh (1951) Elizabeth II (1952) Konrad Adenauer (1953) John Foster Dulles (1954) Harlow Curtice (1955) Hungarian Freedom Fighter (1956) Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Charles de Gaulle (1958) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) U.S. Scientists (1960) George Beadle Charles Draper John Enders Donald A. Glaser Joshua Lederberg Willard Libby Linus Pauling Edward Purcell Isidor Rabi Emilio Segrè William Shockley Edward Teller Charles Townes James Van Allen Robert Woodward John F. Kennedy (1961) Pope John XXIII (1962) Martin Luther King, Jr. (1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) William Westmoreland (1965) Baby boomers (1966) Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) The Apollo 8 Astronauts (1968) William Anders Frank Borman Jim Lovell The Middle Americans (1969) Willy Brandt (1970) Richard Nixon (1971) Henry Kissinger Richard Nixon (1972) John Sirica (1973) King Faisal (1974) American Women (1975) Susan Brownmiller Kathleen Byerly Alison Cheek Jill Conway Betty Ford Ella Grasso Carla Hills Barbara Jordan Billie Jean King Carol Sutton Susie Sharp Addie L. Wyatt Complete roster 1927–1950 1951–1975 1976–2000 2001–present v t e National Football Foundation Gold Medal Winners 1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959: Douglas MacArthur 1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg 1961: John F. Kennedy 1962: Byron "Whizzer" White 1963: Roger Q. Blough 1964: Donold B. Lourie 1965: Juan T. Trippe 1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik 1967: Frederick L. Hovde 1968: Chester J. LaRoche 1969: Richard Nixon 1970: Thomas J. Hamilton 1971: Ronald Reagan 1972: Gerald Ford 1973: John Wayne 1974: Gerald B. Zornow 1975: David Packard 1976: Edgar B. Speer 1977: Louis H. Wilson 1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy 1979: William P. Lawrence 1980: Walter J. Zable 1981: Justin W. Dart 1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown , Willie Davis , Jack Kemp , Ron Kramer , Jim Swink 1983: Jack Kemp 1984: John F. McGillicuddy 1985: William I. Spencer 1986: William H. Morton 1987: Charles R. Meyer 1988: Clinton E. Frank 1989: Paul Brown 1990: Thomas H. Moorer 1991: George H. W. Bush 1992: Donald R. Keough 1993: Norman Schwarzkopf 1994: Thomas S. Murphy 1995: Harold Alfond 1996: Gene Corrigan 1997: Jackie Robinson 1998: John H. McConnell 1999: Keith Jackson 2000: Fred M. Kirby II 2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs 2002: George Steinbrenner 2003: Tommy Franks 2004: William V. Campbell 2005: Jon F. Hanson 2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden 2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach 2008: John Glenn 2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman 2010: Bill Cosby v t e Notable figures of the Cold War Soviet Union Joseph Stalin Vyacheslav Molotov Andrei Gromyko Nikita Khrushchev Anatoly Dobrynin Leonid Brezhnev Alexei Kosygin Yuri Andropov Konstantin Chernenko Mikhail Gorbachev Nikolai Ryzhkov Eduard Shevardnadze Gennady Yanayev Boris Yeltsin United States Harry S. Truman George Marshall Joseph McCarthy Dwight D. Eisenhower John Foster Dulles John F. Kennedy Robert F. Kennedy Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. Robert McNamara Lyndon B. Johnson Richard Nixon Henry Kissinger Gerald Ford Jimmy Carter Ronald Reagan George Shultz Caspar Weinberger George H. W. Bush People's Republic of China Mao Zedong Zhou Enlai Hua Guofeng Deng Xiaoping Zhao Ziyang Japan Hirohito Shigeru Yoshida Ichirō Hatoyama Nobusuke Kishi Eisaku Satō Kakuei Tanaka Takeo Miki Takeo Fukuda Masayoshi Ōhira Zenko Suzuki Yasuhiro Nakasone Noboru Takeshita Sōsuke Uno Toshiki Kaifu West Germany Konrad Adenauer Walter Hallstein Willy Brandt Helmut Schmidt Helmut Kohl United Kingdom Winston Churchill Clement Attlee Ernest Bevin Anthony Eden Harold Macmillan Alec Douglas-Home Kim Philby Harold Wilson Edward Heath James Callaghan Margaret Thatcher Italy Alcide De Gasperi Palmiro Togliatti Giulio Andreotti Aldo Moro Enrico Berlinguer Francesco Cossiga Bettino Craxi France Charles de Gaulle Alain Poher Georges Pompidou Valéry Giscard d'Estaing François Mitterrand Finland Urho Kekkonen Spain Francisco Franco Luis Carrero-Blanco Juan Carlos I Adolfo Suárez Felipe González Portugal António de Oliveira Salazar Marcelo Caetano Álvaro Cunhal Salgueiro Maia Otelo Saraiva de Carvalho António de Spínola Vasco Gonçalves António Ramalho Eanes Mário Soares Francisco de Sá Carneiro Aníbal Cavaco Silva People's Republic of Poland Bolesław Bierut Władysław Gomułka Edward Gierek Wojciech Jaruzelski Pope John Paul II Lech Wałęsa Canada William Lyon Mackenzie King Louis St. Laurent John Diefenbaker Lester Pearson Pierre Trudeau Joe Clark John Turner Brian Mulroney Kim Campbell Philippines Benigno Aquino, Jr. Corazon Aquino Juan Ponce Enrile Gringo Honasan Nur Misuari Jose Maria Sison Diosdado Macapagal Ferdinand Marcos Imelda Marcos Fidel V. Ramos Africa José Eduardo dos Santos Jonas Savimbi (Angola) Patrice Lumumba Mobutu Sese Seko (Congo/Zaire) Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam (Ethiopia) Kwame Nkrumah (Ghana) Julius Nyerere (Tanzania) Idi Amin (Uganda) Muammar Gaddafi (Libya) Siad Barre (Somalia) Eastern Bloc Enver Hoxha (Albania) Todor Zhivkov (Bulgaria) Alexander Dubček (Czechoslovakia) Walter Ulbricht Erich Honecker (East Germany) Mátyás Rákosi Imre Nagy János Kádár (Hungary) Nicolae Ceauşescu (Romania) Josip Broz Tito (Yugoslavia) Latin America Juan Domingo Perón Jorge Rafael Videla Leopoldo Galtieri (Argentina) Getúlio Vargas Luís Prestes Leonel Brizola João Goulart Castelo Branco (Brazil) Salvador Allende Augusto Pinochet (Chile) Fidel Castro Che Guevara (Cuba) Daniel Ortega (Nicaragua) Marcos Pérez Jiménez Rómulo Betancourt (Venezuela) Manuel Noriega (Panama) Jacobo Árbenz Guzmán (Guatemala) Middle East Nur Muhammad Taraki Hafizullah Amin Babrak Karmal Mohammad Najibullah Ahmad Shah Massoud (Afghanistan) Gamal Abdel Nasser Anwar Sadat (Egypt) Mohammad Reza Pahlavi Mohammad Mosaddegh Ayatollah Khomeini (Iran) Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr Saddam Hussein (Iraq) Menachem Begin (Israel) Michel Aflaq Salah Jadid Hafez al-Assad (Syria) South and East Asia Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (Bangladesh) U Nu Ne Win ( Burma ) Pol Pot (Cambodia) Indira Gandhi Jawaharlal Nehru (India) Sukarno Suharto Mohammad Hatta Adam Malik (Indonesia) Kim Il-sung (North Korea) Syngman Rhee Park Chung-hee (South Korea) Muhammad Ayub Khan Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq (Pakistan) Chiang Kai-shek Chiang Ching-kuo (Taiwan) Ho Chi Minh Le Duan (Vietnam) Ngo Dinh Diem (South Vietnam) Category Portal Timeline of events v t e Cabinet of President Richard Nixon (1969–1974) Vice President Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Secretary of State William P. Rogers (1969–1973) Henry Kissinger (1973–1977) Secretary of the Treasury David M. Kennedy (1969–1971) John Connally (1971–1972) George P. Shultz (1972–1974) William E. Simon (1974–1975) Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird (1969–1973) Elliot Richardson (1973–1974) James R. Schlesinger (1974–1975) Attorney General John N. Mitchell (1969–1972) Richard Kleindienst (1972–1973) Elliot Richardson (1973–1974) William B. Saxbe (1974–1975) Postmaster General Winton M. Blount (1969–1971) Secretary of the Interior Walter Joseph Hickel (1969–1971) Rogers Morton (1971–1975) Secretary of the Agriculture Clifford M. Hardin (1969–1971) Earl Butz (1971–1976) Secretary of Commerce Maurice Stans (1969–1972) Peter Peterson (1972–1973) Frederick B. Dent (1973–1975) Secretary of Labor George P. Shultz (1969–1970) James Day Hodgson (1970–1973) Peter J. Brennan (1973–1975) Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare Robert Finch (1969–1970) Elliot Richardson (1970–1973) Caspar Weinberger (1973–1975) Secretary of Housing and Urban Development George W. Romney (1969–1973) James Thomas Lynn (1973–1975) Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe (1969–1973) Claude Brinegar (1973–1975) Authority control : PND : 11858832X | LCCN : n79018757 | VIAF : 44303100 | SELIBR : 235970 | WorldCat Persondata Name Nixon, Richard Milhous Alternative names Richard Nixon Short description American politician, 37th President of the United States (1969–1974) Date of birth January 9, 1913 Place of birth Yorba Linda, California, United States Date of death April 22, 1994 Place of death New York City, New York, United States