Battle of Vukovar

tagline From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia /tagline subtitle /subtitle jumpto Jump to: navigation , search /jumpto bodycontent Battle of Vukovar Part of the Croatian War of Independence The Vukovar water tower , 2010. Heavily damaged in the battle, the tower has been preserved as a symbol of the conflict. Date 25 August – 18 November 1991 Location Vukovar , Croatia Vukovar Vukovar (Croatia) Result Serbian Pyrrhic victory [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Belligerents Yugoslav People's Army SAO Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Syrmia ( Croatian Serb insurgents) Republic of Serbia Territorial Defence Force Serb Volunteer Guard White Eagles Republic of Croatia Croatian National Guard (to November 1991) Croatian Army (from November 1991) HOS Commanders and leaders Aleksandar Spirkovski (to end September 1991) Života Panić (from end September 1991) Mile Mrkšić Veselin Šljivančanin Mladen Bratić † Goran Hadžić Andrija Biorčević Željko Ražnatović Vojislav Šešelj Blago Zadro † Mile Dedaković Branko Borković Marko Babić Anton Tus Robert Šilić † Strength ~ 36,000 [ 3 ] ~ 1,800 [ 4 ] Casualties and losses 3,603 casualties (1,103 dead, 2,500 wounded) 3 aircraft 110 armoured vehicles [ 5 ] Official Croatian figures: 1,656 casualties (879 dead, 777 wounded) [ 6 ] 1,131 civilians killed [ 7 ] 550 civilians missing [ 8 ] v t e Croatian War of Independence Log Revolution Pakrac Plitvice Lakes Borovo Selo May 1991 Coast-91 Opera Orientalis Dalj Osijek Vukovar ( Battle Massacre ) Šibenik The Barracks Banski dvori Široka Kula Dalmatian channels Dubrovnik Lovas Gospić Saborsko Baćin Otkos 10 Škabrnja Erdut Orkan 91 Voćin Vihor Joševica Bruška ECMM helicopter downing Miljevci Tigar Maslenica Medak Pocket Winter '94 Flash Zagreb Summer '95 Storm Maestral Timeline of all major events Events in Serbia The Battle of Vukovar ( Croatian : Bitka za Vukovar , Serbian : Битка за Вуковар, Bitka za Vukovar ) was an 87-day siege of Vukovar in eastern Croatia by the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA), supported by various paramilitary forces from Serbia , between August and November 1991. Before the Croatian War of Independence the Baroque town was a prosperous, mixed community of Croats , Serbs and other ethnic groups. As Yugoslavia began to break up , Serbia's President Slobodan Milošević and Croatia's President Franjo Tuđman started to pursue nationalist politics. In 1990, an armed insurrection was started by Croatian Serb militias, supported by the Serbian government and paramilitary groups, who seized control of Serb-populated areas of Croatia. The JNA began to intervene in favour of the rebellion, and conflict broke out in the eastern Croatian region of Slavonia in May 1991. In August the JNA launched a full-scale attack against Croatian-held territory in eastern Slavonia, including Vukovar. Vukovar was defended by around 1,800 lightly armed soldiers of the Croatian National Guard (ZNG) and civilian volunteers, against 36,000 JNA soldiers and Serbian paramilitaries equipped with heavy armour and artillery. During the battle shells and rockets were fired into the town at a rate of up to 12,000 a day. [ 9 ] At the time it was the fiercest and most protracted battle in Europe, and Vukovar was the first major European town entirely destroyed since the Second World War . [ 10 ] [ 11 ] When Vukovar fell on 18 November 1991, hundreds of soldiers and civilians were massacred by Serb forces and at least 31,000 civilians were deported from the town and its surroundings. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Most of the Vukovar population was ethnically cleansed and the town became part of the self-declared Republic of Serbian Krajina . Several Serb military and political officials, including Milošević, were later indicted and in some cases jailed for war crimes committed during and after the battle. The battle exhausted the JNA and proved a turning point in the Croatian war. A ceasefire was declared a few weeks later. Vukovar remained in Serb hands until 1998 when it was peacefully reintegrated into Croatia. It has since been rebuilt but has less than half of its pre-war population and many buildings are still scarred by the battle. Its two principal ethnic communities remain deeply divided and it has not regained its former prosperity. Contents 1 Background 2 Prelude to the battle 3 Opposing forces 3.1 Croatian forces 3.2 Yugoslav and Serb forces 4 Phase I, August to September 1991 4.1 JNA weaknesses and adoption of new tactics 5 Phase II, October to November 1991 5.1 Fall of Vukovar 6 Casualties 6.1 Croatian 6.2 Serbian and Yugoslav 7 War crimes 7.1 Indictments and trials 8 Political aspects 8.1 Propaganda 8.2 International reaction 8.3 Croatian reaction 8.4 Serbian reaction 8.5 Other Yugoslav reaction 9 Occupation, restoration and reconstruction 10 Commemorations and memorials 11 Films and books 12 Notes 13 References 14 External links [ edit ] Background View of Vukovar from the Danube in 1917 Vukovar is an important regional centre on Croatia's eastern border, situated in eastern Slavonia on the west bank of the Danube river. The area has a diverse population of Croats, Serbs, Hungarians , Slovaks , Ruthenians and many other nationalities, who had lived together for centuries in relative harmony before the Croatian war. It was one of the wealthiest areas of Yugoslavia before the war. [ 14 ] Vukovar's long-standing prosperity was reflected in one of Croatia's finest ensembles of Baroque architecture . [ 15 ] The region underwent major demographic changes following the Second World War , when its ethnic German inhabitants were expelled and replaced with Serb and Montenegrin settlers from elsewhere in Yugoslavia. [ 16 ] In the last Yugoslav census in 1991, the Vukovar municipality, which included the town and surrounding villages, was recorded as having 84,189 inhabitants, of whom 43.8 per cent were Croats, 37.5 per cent were Serbs and the remainder were members of other ethnic groups. The town of Vukovar had 47 per cent Croats to 32.3 per cent Serbs. [ 17 ] From 1945, the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was governed as a federal socialist state comprising six newly-created republics – Slovenia , Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia, Montenegro and Macedonia . [ 18 ] The current border between Serbia and Croatia was defined in 1945 by a Yugoslav federal government commission which assigned areas with a majority Serb population to the Socialist Republic of Serbia and those with a Croatian majority to the Socialist Republic of Croatia . [ 19 ] This left a large Serb minority in Croatian territory. After Yugoslavia's leader Josip Broz Tito died in 1980, long-suppressed ethnic nationalism revived and the individual republics began to assert their authority more strongly as the federal government weakened. Slovenia and Croatia moved towards multi-party democracy and economic reform, but Serbia's authoritarian communist President Slobodan Milošević opposed reform and sought to increase the power of the communist Yugoslav government. [ 20 ] In 1990, Slovenia and Croatia held elections that ended communist rule and brought pro-independence nationalist parties to power in both republics. In Croatia, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) party of Franjo Tuđman took office, with Tuđman as President. [ 21 ] Tuđman's programme was opposed by many members of Croatia's Serbian minority, towards whom he was overtly antagonistic. [ 21 ] The Serb Democratic Party (SDS) of Croatia, supported by Milošević, denounced the HDZ as a reincarnation of the nationalist-fascist Ustasha movement, which had massacred hundreds of thousands of Serbs during the Second World War. [ 22 ] From mid-1990, the SDS mounted an armed rebellion in Serb-inhabited areas of Croatia and set up the self-declared Serbian Autonomous Oblast of Krajina with covert support from the Serbian government and Serbian paramilitary groups. The Croatian government rapidly lost control of large areas of the republic. [ 22 ] In February 1991, the Krajina Serbs declared independence from Croatia and announced that they would unite with Serbia. Other Serb communities around Croatia also announced that they would secede and established their own militias. [ 23 ] [ edit ] Prelude to the battle The conflict between Serbs and Croats spread to eastern Slavonia in early 1991. On 1 April, Serb villagers around Vukovar and other towns in eastern Slavonia began to erect barricades across main roads. [ 24 ] The White Eagles , a Serbian paramilitary group led by Vojislav Šešelj , moved into the Serb-populated village of Borovo Selo just north of Vukovar. [ 25 ] On 1 May, Gojko Šušak , a Croatian government minister and hardline nationalist, personally fired three Armbrust shoulder-launched anti-tank missiles at houses inhabited by Serbs in Borovo Selo. There were no casualties, but the attack aggravated and deepened ethnic tensions. [ 26 ] The following day Serb paramilitaries ambushed two Croatian police buses in the centre of Borovo Selo, killing 12 policemen and injuring 22 more. Three Serbs were also killed. [ 24 ] The Borovo Selo killings were the worst act of violence that had occurred between ethnic Serbs and Croats since the Second World War. [ 27 ] They enraged many Croatians and led to a surge of ethnic violence across Slavonia. [ 28 ] A Serbian paramilitary patrolling in Erdut , eastern Slavonia, 1991. Shortly after, units of the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) moved into Borovo Selo. The army's intervention was welcomed by local Croatian leaders, but Croatian deputy interior minister Milan Brezak accused the JNA of preventing the Croatian police from dealing with the paramilitaries. [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Gun battles broke out across the region between rival militias. [ 28 ] In Vukovar, Croatians harassed Serb residents, sometimes violently. Croatian police forcibly took over the local radio station, Radio Vukovar, and Serb members of the station's ethnically mixed staff were fired and replaced with Croats. [ 31 ] Serb militias systematically blocked transport routes in the predominately Serb-inhabited countryside around Vukovar, and within days the town could only be reached by an unpaved track running through Croat-inhabited villages. The atmosphere in Vukovar was said to be "murderous". [ 32 ] On 19 May 1991, the Croatian government held a nationwide referendum on a declaration of sovereignty. In Vukovar, as elsewhere in Croatia, hardline Serb nationalists urged Serbs to boycott the referendum, while moderates advocated using the poll to register opposition to independence. Many local Serbs did vote, [ 33 ] but the referendum passed with 94 per cent nationally voting in favour. [ 34 ] Violence in and around Vukovar worsened after the independence referendum. Repeated gun and bomb attacks were reported in the town and surrounding villages. [ 35 ] Serb paramilitaries expelled thousands of non-Serbs from their homes in the municipality. [ 36 ] Croatian paramilitaries, led by Tomislav Merčep , attacked Serbs in and around Vukovar; between thirty [ 37 ] and eighty-six Serbs were alleged to have disappeared or been killed, and thousands of others fled their homes. [ 38 ] A Croatian government representative in Vukovar told the Zagreb authorities that "the city is again [the] victim of terror, armed strife and provocative shoot-outs with potentially unfathomable consequences. The policy pursued so far has created an atmosphere of terror among the Croatian and Serbian population." [ 39 ] Gunmen from both sides burned and looted hundreds of houses and farms in the area. [ 40 ] The conflict blurred ethnic lines. Many Serbs who had lived in Vukovar for generations – known as the starosedioci or "old settlers" – resisted the propaganda coming from Belgrade and Knin and continued to live peacefully with their Croatian neighbours. The došljaci , or "newcomers", whose families had relocated from southern Serbia and Montenegro to replace the deported Germans after 1945, were the most responsive to nationalist appeals. Paolo Rumiz describes how they "tried to win their coethnics over to the patriotic mobilization, and when they had no success with that, they killed them, plundered their property and goods, or drove them away. The old settlers would not let themselves be stirred up against other nationalities." [ 41 ] When Croats fled the fighting they often gave their house keys for safekeeping to their Serb neighbours, whom they trusted, rather than to the Croatian police. Sabrina P. Ramet comments that the distinctive feature of the war in eastern Slavonia was "the mobilization of those who were not integrated into the multi-cultural life of the cities against urban multi-culturalism." [ 42 ] The former mayor of Belgrade, Bogdan Bogdanović, characterises the attack on Vukovar as an act of " urbicide ", a deliberate assault on urbanism. [ 43 ] [ edit ] Opposing forces Map of Vukovar and the surrounding area By the end of July 1991, an improvised Croatian defence force in Vukovar was almost surrounded by Serbian militias in the neighbouring villages. Paramilitaries, JNA soldiers and Serbian conscripts of the Territorial Defence Forces ( Croatian : Teritorijalna obrana , Serbian : Територијална одбрана or TO) were present in Serb-inhabited areas. There was a small JNA force in the town barracks in the Sajmište district of Vukovar, surrounded by territory controlled by Croatian forces. [ 44 ] Although the two sides were commonly referred to as "Croatian" and "Serbian" or "Yugoslav", Serbs and Croats as well as many other of Yugoslavia's national groups fought on both sides. The first commander of the attacking force was a Macedonian, [ 45 ] and a substantial portion of the Croatian defenders were Serbs and other ethnicities. [ 46 ] [ edit ] Croatian forces The Croatian force in Vukovar comprised 1,800 men assembled from units of the newly created Croatian National Guard, including 400 members of the 3rd Guards Brigade and the 1st Guards Brigade . The 4th Battalion of the 3rd Guards Brigade was stationed in the city from the beginning, while elements of the 1st Guards Brigade arrived retreating from elsewhere in western Syrmia. In addition to the guardsmen there were 300 police officers and 1,100 civilian volunteers from Vukovar and nearby communities. [ 4 ] The bulk of the force had initially been organised in an improvised manner, [ 47 ] but was formally reorganised in late September 1991 as the 204th Vukovar Brigade , also known as the 124th Brigade. [ 47 ] Volunteers arrived from other parts of Croatia, including from the far-right paramilitary Croatian Defence Forces (HOS) backed by Dobroslav Paraga 's extreme nationalist Croatian Party of Rights (HSP). [ 48 ] The defenders were a cross-section of Vukovar society; as many as a third were non-Croats, including Serbs, Ruthenians, Hungarians and other ethnicities. [ 46 ] About a hundred of the defenders were Serbs. According to Zoran Šangut, one of the Croat defenders, "We had complete confidence in them. They defended Vukovar alongside us." [ 49 ] The Croatian force in Vukovar was commanded by Mile Dedaković , a former JNA officer who had joined the ZNG, Dedaković volunteered for a post in Vukovar and took charge of the town's defences. [ 50 ] During the siege of Vukovar he was referred to as Jastreb ("Hawk"). [ 51 ] At the time, the Croatian Minister of Defence Šušak publicly claimed that Dedaković was a Serb, [ 52 ] a claim that was later reprinted by independent sources, [ 51 ] but was false. [ 52 ] Dedaković's second-in-command, Branko Borković, was another former JNA officer who had volunteered for service in Vukovar. [ 53 ] The two men established a unified command structure, organised the defenders into a single brigade and implemented an integrated defence system. [ 54 ] A defensive ring of six sectors was established, each assigned to one unit within the 204th Brigade. [ 55 ] The defenders used a network of cellars, canals, ditches and trenches to redeploy around the sectors as needed. [ 56 ] At the start of the battle they were poorly armed and many were equipped only with hunting rifles. They relied mostly on light infantry weapons, but obtained a few artillery pieces and anti-aircraft guns and improvised their own land mines. [ 57 ] They also obtained several hundred anti-tank weapons such as M79 and M80 rocket launchers, but were critically short of ammunition throughout the battle. [ 4 ] [ 58 ] Although the Croatian government sent some supplies and reinforcements in the early stages, the defenders received little of significance. This was partly because of the difficulty of reaching the town, but may also have been a result of the Croatian government's decision to supply large quantities of arms to the Bosnian Croats in advance of the Bosnian War . In doing so, it starved its own forces of weapons and ammunition. [ 58 ] [ edit ] Yugoslav and Serb forces The Yugoslav People's Army had better weapons and equipment than the Croatian forces. Fighter aircraft were used in the battle. The attacking force included JNA soldiers conscripted from across Yugoslavia, members of the TO, Chetniks (Serbian nationalist paramilitaries), local Serb militiamen and units of the Yugoslav Navy and the Yugoslav Air Force . [ 57 ] At their peak, the Yugoslav and Serb forces in the vicinity of Vukovar numbered about 36,000 troops. [ 3 ] They were equipped with heavy artillery, rockets and tanks and supported by aircraft and naval vessels on the Danube. [ 57 ] Although the battle was fought primarily by the federal Yugoslav military, the government of Serbia was directly involved. The Serbian secret police agency, the SDB, took part in military operations, and some of its officers commanded Serbian TO units fighting at Vukovar. [ 59 ] The Serbian interior ministry directed the activities of the paramilitaries [ 60 ] as well as arming and equipping them. [ 61 ] Slobodan Milošević was later accused of direct involvement. According to Veselin Šljivančanin , who was later convicted of war crimes committed at Vukovar, the order to shell Vukovar came "from Dedinje " – the elite Belgrade quarter where Milošević lived. [ 62 ] The JNA's strategic offensive plan in Croatia, 1991. The plan was abandoned after the Battle of Vukovar exhausted the JNA's ability to prosecute the war further in Croatia. At the start of the war in Slovenia, the army still saw itself as the defender of a federal, communist Yugoslavia, rather than an instrument of Serbian nationalism. Its head, General Veljko Kadijević , the Yugoslav Minister of Defence and a committed communist, initially sought to forcibly keep Yugoslavia together and proclaimed the army's neutrality in the Serb-Croat conflict. [ 63 ] The JNA leadership aimed to cut Croatia in two by seizing the Serb-inhabited inland regions, almost all of the Dalmatian coast and much of central and eastern Croatia. It aimed to force Croatia's political leadership to capitulate and renegotiate its membership of Yugoslavia. [ 64 ] The JNA's leadership was not yet dominated by ethnic Serbs, and these early goals reflected the "Yugoslav" outlook of its multiethnic leadership. Kadijević was half-Croat and half-Serb, his deputy was a Slovene, the commander of JNA forces in the first phase of the battle was a Macedonian, and the head of the Yugoslav Air Force, which repeatedly bombed Vukovar during the battle, was a Croat. [ 45 ] [ 65 ] The loss of Slovenia in the Ten-Day War made it impossible to fulfil the original objective of keeping Yugoslavia intact. Many of the Serb members of the army no longer wanted to fight for a multiethnic Yugoslavia. The army developed an increasingly Serbian character as non-Serbs deserted or refused to be drafted. [ 63 ] Some JNA commanders overtly supported the Serb rebels in Croatia and provided them with weapons. [ 61 ] Although Kadijević and other senior JNA commanders initially argued that "the JNA must defend all the nations of Yugoslavia", [ 61 ] they eventually recognised that they had no chance of achieving their original goals, and threw their support behind the rebel Serbs of Croatia. [ 63 ] Yugoslav and Serb propaganda portrayed the Croatians as genocidal Ustashas who had illegally taken over Yugoslav territory and were threatening Serb civilians in a reprise of the anti-Serb pogroms of the Second World War. [ 44 ] Kadijević later justified the JNA's offensive against Vukovar on the grounds that it was part of the "backbone of the Croatian army" and had to be "liberated". The JNA's periodical Narodna Armija claimed after the battle that Vukovar "had for decades been prepared to support German military penetration down the Danube." [ 48 ] The paramilitary leader Vojislav Šešelj declared: "We're all one army. This war is a great test for Serbs. Those who pass the test will become winners. Deserters cannot go unpunished. Not a single Ustasha must leave Vukovar alive." [ 66 ] [ edit ] Phase I, August to September 1991 Map of military operations in eastern Slavonia, September 1991 – January 1992. The front line at the end of the campaign was to remain as the border between Croatian and Serb-held territory until January 1998. The Battle of Vukovar took place in two phases over about 90 days: from August to September 1991, before the town was fully surrounded, and from early October to mid-November, when the town was encircled then taken by the JNA. [ 55 ] From June, the Serb forces subjected Vukovar and neighbouring villages to daily or near-daily artillery and mortar fire. [ 44 ] During July the JNA and TO began deploying in large numbers across eastern Slavonia, surrounding Vukovar on three sides. [ 55 ] Heavy fighting began at the end of August. On 23 August Borovo Naselje , the Croatian-held northern suburb of Vukovar, came under heavy shellfire. Croatian forces shot down two Yugoslav G-2 Galeb fighter aircraft using shoulder-launched anti-aircraft missiles . The following day the JNA, Yugoslav Air Force and Yugoslav Navy launched a major attack using aircraft, naval vessels on the Danube, tanks and artillery. The attack, which was mounted from both sides of the border, caused extensive damage and many civilian casualties. [ 44 ] The Croatian government launched an attack on JNA garrisons and arms depots throughout its territory on 14 September – an offensive dubbed the Battle of the Barracks . Vukovar's JNA barracks was one of those attacked that day, but the local Croatian forces failed to capture it. In retaliation, Serb paramilitaries attacked areas to the southwest of Vukovar from the direction of Negoslavci , forcing about 2,000 people to flee. There were reports of mass killings and scores of civilian deaths. [ 67 ] Croatian forces outside the Vukovar perimeter received large quantities of arms and ammunition from depots captured elsewhere, enabling them to hold the line against JNA attacks. [ 55 ] The JNA responded by launching a major offensive in eastern Slavonia, from where it intended to progress west via Vinkovci and Osijek to Zagreb. The army did not bypass Vukovar, because they wished to relieve the besieged barracks and to eliminate a possible threat to their supply lines. The JNA leadership did not intend to make Vukovar the main focus of the offensive but, as happened with Stalingrad in the Second World War , an initially inconsequential engagement became an essential political symbol for both sides. [ 1 ] On 19 September, a JNA force consisting of at least a hundred T-55 and M-84 tanks with armoured personnel carriers and heavy artillery pieces left Belgrade and crossed into Croatia near the Serbian town of Šid on 20 September. [ 68 ] Croatian units were quickly routed and fell back to Vukovar. The JNA's 1st Guards Mechanised Brigade quickly reached the Vukovar barracks and lifted the Croatian siege of the facility. They also moved to encircle Vukovar. By 30 September, the town was almost completely surrounded; all roads in and out were blocked, and the only route in was via a farm track through a perilously exposed cornfield. [ 69 ] The JNA launched repeated assaults on Vukovar but failed to make any progress. Its armour, designed for combat in open country, was barely able to enter Vukovar's narrow streets. Support from regular infantry was lacking, and the poorly trained and motivated troops of the TO were inadequate substitutes. [ 3 ] The JNA's soldiers appeared to have little understanding of how to conduct urban operations and its officers displayed slow and reactive decision-making on the ground. [ 70 ] Croatian forces countered the JNA's attacks by mining approach roads, sending out mobile teams equipped with anti-tank weapons, deploying many snipers , and fighting back from heavily fortified positions. [ 3 ] The JNA initially relied on massing armoured spearheads which would advance along a street in a column followed by a few companies of infantry. [ 71 ] The defenders responded by opening fire with anti-tank weapons at very close range – often as short as 20 metres (66 ft) – to disable the lead and rear vehicles, trapping the rest of the column where it could be systematically disabled. [ 72 ] The defenders tried to avoid completely destroying enemy armour, as the materiel that they retrieved from disabled vehicles was an important source of resupply. [ 73 ] They used a strategy of "active defence", carrying out hit-and-run attacks to keep the JNA forces off balance. [ 74 ] Anti-tank and anti-personnel mines hindered JNA manoeuvres. The defenders used unconventional tactics to undermine enemy morale, such as firing weather rockets at Serb forces [ 75 ] and sabotaging JNA tanks by planting mines underneath them while they were parked at night, so that they would blow up when the crews started them in the morning. [ 76 ] JNA casualties were heavy; on one road, dubbed the "tank graveyard", about a hundred JNA armoured vehicles were destroyed, fifteen of them by Croatian Colonel Marko Babić . [ 77 ] The high casualties had a debilitating effect on morale all the way up the chain of command. [ 78 ] The JNA began launching artillery and rocket barrages against the town. By the end of the battle, over 700,000 shells and other missiles had been fired at Vukovar [ 79 ] at a rate of up to 12,000 a day. [ 9 ] It is estimated that Vukovar as well as its surroundings were bombarded with a total of over 2.5 million shells of mortar and artillery of over 20 mm. [ 80 ] Metre for metre, the bombardment was more intense than at Stalingrad. [ 53 ] The thousands of civilians remaining in Vukovar took shelter from the bombardment in cellars and bomb shelters that had been built during the Cold War . [ 69 ] [ edit ] JNA weaknesses and adoption of new tactics A JNA M-84 tank disabled by a mine laid by the defenders of Vukovar in November 1991 The JNA's lack of infantry support was due to a disastrously low level of mobilisation in the preceding months. Many reservists – who were drawn from all the Yugoslav republics, including Croatia – refused to report for duty, and many serving soldiers deserted rather than fight. [ 81 ] Serbia was never formally at war and no general mobilisation was carried out. [ 82 ] An estimated 150,000 Serbs went abroad to avoid conscription, and many others deserted or went into hiding. [ 83 ] Only 13 per cent of conscripts reported for duty. [ 84 ] Another 40,000 staged rebellions in towns across Serbia; the Serbian newspaper Vreme commented in July 1991 that the situation was one of "total military disintegration". [ 85 ] Morale on the battlefield was poor. JNA commanders resorted to firing on their own positions to motivate their men to fight. When the commander of a JNA unit at Vukovar demanded to know who was willing to fight and who wanted to go home, the unit split in two; one conscript, unable to decide which side to take, shot himself on the spot. [ 86 ] A JNA officer who served at Vukovar later described how his men refused to obey orders on several occasions, "abandoning combat vehicles, discarding weapons, gathering on some flat ground, sitting and singing ' Give Peace a Chance ' by John Lennon." In late October, an entire infantry battalion from Novi Sad in Serbia abandoned an attack on Borovo Naselje and fled. Another group of reservists threw away their weapons and went back to Serbia on foot across a nearby bridge. [ 87 ] A tank driver, Vladimir Živković, drove his vehicle from the front line at Vukovar to the Yugoslav parliament in Belgrade, where he parked on the steps in front of the building. He was arrested and declared insane by the authorities. His treatment enraged his colleagues, who protested by taking over a local radio station at gunpoint and issuing a declaration that "we are not traitors, but we do not want to be aggressors." [ 88 ] In late September, Lieutenant Colonel General Života Panić was put in charge of the operation against Vukovar. He established new headquarters and command-and-control arrangements to resolve the disorganisation that had hindered the JNA's operations. Panić divided the JNA forces into Northern and Southern Areas of Responsibility (AORs). The northern AOR was assigned to Major General Mladen Bratić , while Colonel Mile Mrkšić was given charge of the south. [ 89 ] As well as fresh troops, paramilitary volunteers from Serbia were brought in. They were well armed and highly motivated but often undisciplined and brutal. They were formed into units of company and battalion size as substitutes for the missing reservists. [ 3 ] The commander of the Novi Sad corps was videotaped after the battle praising the Serb Volunteer Guard ("Tigers") of Željko Ražnatović , known as "Arkan": [ 90 ] The greatest credit for this goes to Arkan's volunteers! Although some people accuse me of acting in collusion with paramilitary formations, these are not paramilitary formations here! They are men who came voluntarily to fight for the Serbian cause. We surround a village, he dashes in and kills whoever refuses to surrender. On we go! [ 90 ] Panić combined well-motivated paramilitary infantry with trained engineering units to clear mines and defensive positions, supported by heavy armour and artillery. [ 91 ] The paramilitaries spearheaded a fresh offensive that began on 30 September. The assault succeeded in cutting the Croatian supply route to Vukovar when the village of Marinci , on the route out of the town, was captured on 1 October. Shortly afterwards, the Croatian 204th Brigade's commander, Mile Dedaković, broke out with a small escort, slipping through the Serbian lines to reach the Croatian-held town of Vinkovci. His deputy, Branko Borković, took over command of Vukovar's defences. General Anton Tus , commander of the Croatian forces outside the Vukovar perimeter, put Dedaković in charge of a breakthrough operation to relieve the town and launched a counter-offensive on 13 October. Croatian tanks and infantry, supported by artillery, retook Marinci and drove the JNA back almost to its starting position. [ 3 ] [ 92 ] The counter-offensive was then called off by President Tuđman, citing pressure from the European Community for a ceasefire. This enabled the JNA's 252nd Armoured Brigade to retake the ground that it had lost. From then on the town was completely surrounded and under constant attack from the JNA. [ 92 ] [ edit ] Phase II, October to November 1991 Map of the final phase of the Battle of Vukovar, when the JNA and Serb forces completed the encirclement of Vukovar and systematically invested the town During the final phase of the battle, Vukovar's remaining inhabitants, including several thousand Serbs, took refuge in cellars and communal bomb shelters, which housed up to 700 people each. A crisis committee was established, operating from a nuclear bunker underneath the municipal hospital. The committee took over the running of the town and organised the delivery of food, water and medical supplies. It kept the number of civilians on the streets to a minimum and ensured that each shelter was guarded and had at least one doctor and nurse assigned to it. [ 93 ] The hospital had to deal with hundreds of wounded people – between sixteen and eighty each day, three quarters of them civilians, in the second half of September. [ 67 ] Even though the building was marked with the Red Cross , it was struck by over eight hundred shells during the battle. Much of the building was wrecked, and the staff and patients had to relocate to underground service corridors. The intensive care unit was moved into the building's nuclear bomb shelter. [ 9 ] On 4 October, the Yugoslav Air Force attacked the hospital, destroying its operating theatre. One bomb fell through several floors, failed to explode and landed on the foot of a wounded man, without injuring him. [ 67 ] One of the hospital doctors later asked in Serbia why the hospital had been attacked; he was told: "Because you held wounded Croatian soldiers there." [ 9 ] Croatian forces adapted several Antonov An-2 biplanes to drop supplies by parachute on Vukovar. The aircraft also dropped improvised bombs made of fuel cans and boilers filled with explosive and metal bars. [ 94 ] The crews used GPS to find the target, then pushed the payloads out of the side door. [ 95 ] One of the aircraft was shot down by an SA-6 missile , killing Marko Živković, the commander of the air unit. [ 96 ] The European Community attempted to provide humanitarian aid to the 12,000 civilians trapped within the perimeter, but only one aid convoy made it through. [ 97 ] Croatian forces suspended military action to allow the convoy to pass on 12 October, but the JNA used the pause as cover to make further military gains. After the convoy set off, the JNA delayed it for two days and used the time to lay mines, bring in reinforcements and consolidate JNA control of the road out of Vukovar. [ 98 ] When the convoy arrived, it delivered medical supplies to the hospital at Vukovar and evacuated 114 injured civilians. [ 97 ] On 16 October the JNA mounted a major attack against Borovo Naselje. It achieved some gains, but became bogged down in the face of determined Croatian resistance. [ 3 ] On 30 October the JNA launched a fully coordinated assault, spearheaded by paramilitary forces, with infantry and engineering troops systematically forcing their way through the Croatian defences. The JNA forces, divided into northern and southern operations sectors, attacked several points simultaneously and pushed back the defenders. [ 91 ] The JNA also adopted new tactics, such as firing directly into houses and then driving tanks through them, using tear gas and smoke bombs to drive out the defenders, and using anti-tank and anti-aircraft guns to capture the town building by building. This enabled the Serb forces to flush out the defenders, inflicting heavy casualties. [ 99 ] On 2 November the JNA offensive reached the strategic suburb of Lužac, between Borovo Naselje and Vukovar, cutting one of the two roads linking the town centre with its northern suburb. [ 100 ] Meanwhile the ZNG (which had been renamed as the Croatian Army ) attempted to retake the villages of Marinci and Cerić to reopen the supply route to Vukovar. It mounted a heavy bombardment of the JNA's access routes to Vukovar and a tank attack on JNA lines. JNA General Mladen Bratić was killed when his tank was hit by a shell, but the JNA's advantage in artillery and rockets enabled it to halt the Croatian advance and inflict heavy casualties. [ 56 ] [ edit ] Fall of Vukovar A bomb dropped on Vukovar Hospital by a Yugoslav Air Force jet on 4 October 1991 penetrated several floors to the basement. The patient occupying the bed directly beneath escaped uninjured. The damage has been preserved as a memorial to the battle. JNA troops launched an amphibious assault across the Danube north of Lužac on 3 November to link up with Arkan's paramilitary "Tigers". This attack split the Croatian perimeter in half and divided the main group of defenders in the town centre from a smaller stronghold in Borovo Naselje. The JNA's Operational Group South now began to systematically clear the town centre, cutting off the remaining groups of defenders. [ 91 ] They captured a key hilltop, Milova Brda (Mill Hill), [ 100 ] on 9 November, giving them a clear view of the town. The assault was largely led by paramilitary troops, with JNA and TO soldiers providing support, especially in demining operations and close artillery support. [ 91 ] The Croatian-held village of Bogdanovci , just to the west of Vukovar, fell on 10 November. On 13 November the JNA cut the last link between Borovo Naselje and Vukovar. Croatian forces outside the Vukovar perimeter mounted a last-ditch attempt to break the siege by attacking from the village of Nuštar , but the JNA again repelled them. [ 100 ] By now the defenders were running out of ammunition and were exhausted from fighting around the clock without any prospect of being relieved or replacing their dead and wounded. [ 100 ] They had been reduced to three separate pockets. With defeat now inevitable, several hundred Croatian soldiers and civilians attempted to break out over the course of several days, as the JNA mounted its final offensive. [ 100 ] Most of those in Borovo Naselje were unable to break out and were killed. [ 56 ] On 18 November, the last defenders in Vukovar's town centre surrendered. [ 91 ] Many of Vukovar's civilian inhabitants were living in squalid conditions and nearing starvation. One woman told UN Special Envoy Cyrus Vance that she had spent the last two months in a bomb shelter with her five children without toilets or water for washing. They lived on two slices of bread and a piece of paté per day. [ 101 ] One of Vukovar's defenders described conditions as the battle reached its peak: By early October, there were no cigarettes. People were smoking grape leaves or tea. There was no yeast for bread. My son was eating tinned food with me and my wife. There was less and less of that. The shelling became 24 hours a day, and the cease-fires were worse. When people came out of the shelters to go to the well during the cease-fires, the snipers shot them. You can't keep children in for two months, and when they ran outside, when there was sun in the morning, they shot at them, too. [ 102 ] When the battle ended, the scale of the destruction came as a shock to many who not been out of their shelters in weeks. Siniša Glavašević , a reporter for Croatian Radio and a native of Vukovar, who had stayed in the town throughout the battle, described the scene as the survivors emerged: The picture of Vukovar at the 22nd hour of the 87th day [of the siege] will stay forever in the memory of those who witnessed it. Unearthly scenes are endless, the smell of burning, under the feet the remnants of old roof tiles, building materials, glass, ruins, and a dreadful silence. ... We hope that the torments of Vukovar are over. [ 103 ] Although the fighting was over in the centre of Vukovar, sporadic combat continued for several more days elsewhere in the shattered town. Some defenders continued to resist until 20 November and a few managed to slip away from Borovo Naselje as late as 23 November. [ 100 ] The scene ten days after the surrender: a Vukovar street lies in ruins Foreign journalists and international monitors entered the town soon after the surrender and recorded what they saw. Blaine Harden of the Washington Post wrote: Not one roof, door or wall in all of Vukovar seems to have escaped jagged gouges or gaping holes left by shrapnel, bullets, bombs or artillery shells – all delivered as part of a three-month effort by Serb insurgents and the Serb-led Yugoslav army to wrest the city from its Croatian defenders. Not one building appears habitable, or even repairable. Nearly every tree has been chopped to bits by firepower. [ 104 ] Chuck Sudetic of The New York Times reported: Only soldiers of the Serbian-dominated army, stray dogs and a few journalists walked the smoky, rubble-choked streets amid the ruins of the apartment buildings, stores and hotel in Vukovar's center. Not one of the buildings seen during a daylong outing could be described as habitable. In one park, shell fire had sheared thick trees in half like blades of grass cut by a mower. Across the street, the dome of an Orthodox Christian church had fallen onto the altar. Automatic weapons fire erupted every few minutes as the prowling Serbian soldiers, some of them drunk, took aim at land mines, pigeons and windows that had survived the fighting. [ 105 ] Laura Silber and the BBC 's Allan Little described how "corpses of people and animals littered the streets. Grisly skeletons of buildings still burned, barely a square inch had escaped damage. Serbian volunteers, wild-eyed, roared down the streets, their pockets full of looted treasures." [ 106 ] The JNA celebrated its victory, as Marc Champion of The Independent described: The colonels who ran "Operation Vukovar" entertained more than 100 journalists inside the ruins of the Dunav Hotel at a kind of Mad Hatter's victory celebration. They handed out picture postcards of the old Vukovar as mementoes and served drinks on starched white tablecloths, as wind and rain blew in through shattered windows ... Inside the Dunav Hotel was an Alice in Wonderland world where Colonel [Miodrag] Gvero announced that the gaping holes in the walls had been blasted by the Croatian defenders. They had placed sticks of dynamite in the brickwork to make the army look bad, he said. [ 107 ] [ edit ] Casualties [ edit ] Croatian Croatian forces and civilians suffered heavy casualties during the battle. Croatian general Anton Tus has stated that about 1,100 of Vukovar's defenders were killed and 2,600 defenders and civilians were listed as missing; another 1,000 Croatian soldiers were killed on the approaches to Vinkovci and Osijek. He noted that the intensity of the fighting can be judged by the fact that the losses in eastern Slavonia between September and November 1991 constituted half of all Croatian war casualties during the whole of 1991. [ 56 ] According to figures published in 2006 by the Croatian Ministry of Defence , 879 Croatian soldiers were killed and 770 wounded in Vukovar. [ 6 ] The Central Intelligence Agency estimates Croatian casualties at around 4,000 to 5,000 dead across eastern Slavonia. The 204th Vukovar Brigade lost over 60 per cent of its strength in the battle. [ 91 ] Croatian officials have given figures of 2,000 killed, 800 missing, 3,000 taken prisoner and 42,852 made refugees in eastern Slavonia as a whole. [ 108 ] [ edit ] Serbian and Yugoslav Although JNA losses were undoubtedly substantial, the exact numbers are unclear because of a lack of official data. The JNA officially acknowledged 1,279 killed in action, including 177 officers, during the entire war in Croatia. [ 109 ] According to Anton Tus, the JNA's Novi Sad corps alone lost 1,300 soldiers during the campaign in eastern Slavonia. He extrapolates from this to estimate that between 6,000 and 8,000 soldiers and volunteers died in eastern Slavonia, with the loss of 600 armoured vehicles and heavy weapons and over 20 aircraft. [ 56 ] Serbian sources disagree with this assessment. General Andrija Biorčević, the former commander of the Novi Sad corps, has said there were "[not] more than 1,500 killed on our side." The Serbian journalist Miroslav Lazanski , who has close links with the Serbian military, wrote in the Belgrade newspaper Večernje novosti that "on the side of the JNA, Territorial Defence and volunteer units, exactly 1,103 members were killed." He cited losses of 110 armoured vehicles and two combat aircraft shot down, plus another destroyed due to technical failure. [ 5 ] The actual number may have been considerably greater as casualties were consistently underreported during the war. [ 110 ] [ edit ] War crimes Main article: Vukovar massacre The pig farm at Ovčara where around 260 people were massacred after the Battle of Vukovar Many of those captured at Vukovar, both military and civilians, were killed. Serbian paramilitaries roamed the streets looking for Croats to kill and carried out numerous summary executions. Journalists witnessed one such killing in Vukovar's main street [ 105 ] and also reported seeing the streets strewn with bodies in civilian clothes. [ 111 ] BBC television reporters recorded Serbian paramilitaries chanting: " Slobodane, Slobodane, šalji nam salate, biće mesa, biće mesa, klaćemo Hrvate! " ("Slobodan [Milošević], Slobodan, send us some salad, [for] there will be meat, there will be meat, we will slaughter Croats"). [ 112 ] A Serbian journalist embedded with the JNA reserve forces in Vukovar later reported: After Vukovar fell, people were lined up and made to walk to detention areas. As the prisoners walked by, local Serbian paramilitaries pulled people out of the lines at random, claiming that they had to be executed because they were "war criminals." Most of these people were Croats who had spent the duration of the fighting in basements, particularly in the Vukovar hospital. The selection of those who were to be liquidated also was done as these people were leaving the shelters. They were removed from lines under the supervision, and with the apparent permission, of Major Veselin Šljivančanin, the JNA officer in charge of security after Vukovar's fall. [ 113 ] A child waits to be evacuated by the United Nations in December 1991 after the fall of Vukovar Around 400 people in Vukovar's hospital – non-Serb patients, medical personnel, local political figures and others who had taken refuge there – were taken from the hospital by the JNA. Although some were subsequently released, around 200 were taken to a pig farm at Ovčara nearby and were executed in what became known as the Vukovar massacre . At least fifty others were taken somewhere else and were never seen again. [ 114 ] Thousands more people were transferred by the JNA to prison camps elsewhere in Serb-controlled Croatia and in Serbia proper. Further mass killings followed; at Dalj , north of Vukovar, where many inhabitants were previously massacred , numerous prisoners from Vukovar were subjected to harsh interrogations, beatings and torture, and at least 35 people were killed. [ 115 ] The JNA imprisoned two thousand people in the Velepromet industrial facility in Vukovar. Eight hundred were classified by the JNA as prisoners of war. Many were brutally interrogated, several were shot on the spot by TO members and paramilitaries, and others were sent to Ovčara where they were killed in the massacre. The remaining prisoners were transferred to a JNA-run prison camp at Sremska Mitrovica in Serbia, [ 116 ] [ 117 ] where they were stripped naked on arrival, beaten and interrogated, and forced to sleep for weeks on bare wooden floors. Most were released in January 1992 under an agreement brokered by UN envoy Cyrus Vance. [ 106 ] Others were kept prisoner until mid-1992. [ 118 ] Serbs who had fought to defend Vukovar were particularly harshly treated and were subjected to savage beatings because their captors considered them to be traitors. [ 49 ] Detainees who were not suspected of involvement with the Croatian armed forces were evacuated from Vukovar to other places in Serbia and Croatia. [ 116 ] The non-Serb population of Vukovar and the surrounding region was systematically ethnically cleansed and 31,732 people were forced to leave their homes in the Vukovar district, adding to the tens of thousands already expelled from across eastern Slavonia. [ 12 ] 2,600 people disappeared following the fall of the town, of whom around 550 are still missing. [ 8 ] There were also incidents of war rape , for which two soldiers were later convicted. [ 119 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] The Serb forces singled out a number of prominent individuals. Among them was Dr. Vesna Bosanac , the director of the town's hospital, [ 122 ] who was regarded as a heroine in Croatia [ 106 ] but demonised by the Serbian media. [ 123 ] She and her husband were taken to Sremska Mitrovica prison, where she was locked up in a single room with 66 other women for several weeks. Her husband was subjected to repeated beatings. After appeals from the International Committee of the Red Cross , [ 106 ] the couple were eventually released in a prisoner exchange. [ 122 ] The Croatian Radio journalist Siniša Glavašević, whose broadcasts had become iconic in Croatia, was taken to Ovčara, severely beaten [ 124 ] and shot along with the other victims of the massacre. [ 106 ] Vukovar was systematically looted after its capture. A JNA soldier who fought at Vukovar told Serbia's Dnevni Telegraf newspaper that "the Chetniks [paramilitaries] behaved like professional plunderers, they knew what to look for in the houses they looted." [ 125 ] The JNA also participated in the looting; an official in the Serbian Ministry of Defence commented: "Tell me of even one reservist, especially if he is an officer, who has spent more than a month at the front and has not brought back a fine car filled with everything that would fit inside the car." [ 126 ] The Serb forces looted more than 8,000 artworks from Vukovar, including the contents of the municipal museum, Eltz Castle , which was bombed and destroyed during the siege. Serbia returned 2,000 pieces of looted art in December 2001. [ 127 ] [ 128 ] [ edit ] Indictments and trials Three JNA officers, Mile Mrkšić, Veselin Šljivančanin and Miroslav Radić , were indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on multiple counts of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws of war , having surrendered or been captured during 2002 and 2003. On 27 September 2007, Mrkšić was sentenced by the ICTY to 20 years' imprisonment for murder and torture, and Šljivančanin was sentenced to five years' imprisonment on charges of torture. Radić was acquitted. [ 129 ] Šljivančanin's sentence was increased to 17 years on appeal, [ 130 ] then reduced again to ten years after a second appeal, and he was granted early release in July 2011. [ 131 ] Slavko Dokmanović , the Serb mayor of Vukovar, was also indicted and arrested for his role in the massacre, but committed suicide in June 1998, shortly before judgement was to be announced. [ 132 ] The Serbian paramilitary leader Vojislav Šešelj was indicted on war crimes charges, including several counts of extermination , for the Vukovar hospital massacre, in which his "White Eagles" were allegedly involved. [ 133 ] Croatia also indicted a number of Serbs for war crimes committed in Vukovar [ 134 ] and in December 2005 a Serbian court convicted fourteen former paramilitaries for their involvement in the hospital massacre. [ 135 ] The ICTY linked Željko "Arkan" Ražnatović to the massacre, but he was assassinated in Belgrade before he could be brought to trial. [ 136 ] The ICTY indictment of Slobodan Milošević characterised the overall JNA and Serb offensive in Croatia – including the fighting in eastern Slavonia – as a " joint criminal enterprise " to remove non-Serb populations from Serb-inhabited areas of Croatia. Milošević was charged with numerous crimes against humanity, violations of the laws of war and breaches of the Geneva Conventions in relation to the battle of Vukovar and its aftermath. [ 13 ] He died in March 2006, before his trial could be completed. [ 137 ] The Croatian Serb leader Goran Hadžić was indicted for "wanton destruction of homes, religious and cultural buildings" and "devastation not justified by military necessity" across eastern Slavonia, and for deporting Vukovar's non-Serb population. [ 138 ] He was arrested in July 2011, after seven years on the run, and has pleaded not guilty to fourteen counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity. [ 139 ] Croatian courts indicted Veljko Kadijević and Blagoje Adžić , former commanders of the Yugoslav Army, for war crimes in Vukovar. [ 140 ] In 2011 a Serbian court indicted more than 40 Croatians for alleged war crimes committed in Vukovar, [ 141 ] but an earlier indictment against a Croatian soldier was dropped because of irregularities in the investigation. [ 142 ] [ edit ] Political aspects [ edit ] Propaganda Main article: Propaganda in the Yugoslav Wars The Serbian and Croatian media waged a fierce propaganda battle over the progress and reasons for the battle. Both sides' propaganda machines aimed to promote ultranationalist sentiments and denigrate the other side with no pretence of objectivity or self-criticism. [ 143 ] Croatian media described the Serbian forces as "Serb terrorists" and a "Serbo-Communist army of occupation" intent on crushing a thousand-year dream of an independent Croatia. [ 144 ] The propaganda reached peak intensity in the wake of Vukovar's fall. The Croatian newspaper Novi list denounced the Serbs as "cannibals" and "brutal Serb extremists", [ 145 ] while the Serbian media depicted the JNA and Serbian forces as "liberators" and "defenders" of the Serbian people, and the Croatian forces as "Ustashoid hordes", "blackshirts", "militants" and "drunk and stoned monsters". [ 146 ] There were overt appeals to racial and gender prejudice, including claims that the Croatian defenders had "put on female dress to escape from the town" and had recruited "black men". [ 147 ] Victim status became a central aim for the propaganda machines of both sides, and the battle was used to support claims of atrocities. Victims became interchangeable as anonymous victims were identified as Croats on Zagreb television and as Serbs on Belgrade TV. According to the Serbian opposition periodical Republika , the state-owned station TV Novi Sad was under orders to identify any bodies its reporters filmed as being "Serbian corpses". [ 148 ] After the battle, Belgrade television showed pictures of hundreds of corpses lined up outside Vukovar's hospital and claimed that they were Serbs who had been "massacred" by Croatians. According to Human Rights Watch , the bodies belonged to those who had died of their injuries at the hospital, whose staff had been prevented from burying them by the intense Serbian bombardment, and had been forced to leave them lying in the open. Serbian television continued to broadcast claims of "massacred Serbs in Vukovar" for some time after the fall of the town. [ 149 ] Such victim-centred propaganda had a powerful motivating effect. One Serbian volunteer said that he had never seen the town before the war, but had come to fight because "the Croats had a network of catacombs under the city where they killed and tortured children just because they were Serbs." [ 150 ] Reuters reported erroneously that forty-one children had been massacred in Vukovar by Croatian soldiers; although the claim was retracted a day later, it was used by the Serbian media to justify military action against Croatia. [ 151 ] Many of those fighting at Vukovar believed that they were engaged in a struggle to liberate the town from a hostile occupier. [ 152 ] [ edit ] International reaction The international community made repeated unsuccessful attempts to end the fighting. Both sides violated ceasefires, often within hours. Calls by some European Community members for the Western European Union to intervene militarily were vetoed by the United Kingdom. Instead, a Conference for Yugoslavia was established under the chairmanship of Lord Carrington to find a way to end the conflict. The United Nations (UN) imposed an arms embargo on all of the Yugoslav republics in September 1991 under Security Council Resolution 713 , but this was ineffective, in part because the JNA had no need to import weapons. The European powers abandoned attempts to keep Yugoslavia united and agreed to recognise the independence of Croatia and Slovenia on 15 January 1992. [ 153 ] International observers tried unsuccessfully to prevent the human rights abuses that followed the battle. A visit by UN envoys Marrack Goulding and Cyrus Vance was systematically obstructed by the JNA. Vance's demands to see the hospital, from which wounded patients were being dragged out to be killed, were rebuffed by one of the massacre's authors, Major Veselin Šljivančanin. [ 154 ] The major also blocked Red Cross representatives in an angry confrontation recorded by TV cameras: "This is my country, we have conquered this. This is Yugoslavia, and I am in command here!" [ 155 ] There was no international media presence in Vukovar, as there was in the simultaneous Siege of Dubrovnik and the later Siege of Sarajevo , and relatively little of the fighting in Vukovar was broadcast to foreign audiences. British journalist Misha Glenny commented that the JNA, the Croatian Serb government and many ordinary Serbs were often hostile to the foreign media; the Croatians presented a much more open and friendly attitude. [ 156 ] [ edit ] Croatian reaction The Croatian media gave heavy coverage to the battle, repeatedly airing broadcasts from the besieged town by the journalist Siniša Glavašević. Much popular war art focused on the "VukoWAR", as posters dubbed it. [ 157 ] The Croatian government began suppressing Glavašević's broadcasts when it became clear that defeat was inevitable, [ 157 ] despite the confident slogans of "Vukovar shall not fall" and "Vukovar must not fall." Two of the main daily newspapers, Večernji list and Novi list , failed to report the loss of Vukovar and, on 20 November, two days after it had fallen, repeated the official line that the fight was still continuing. News of the surrender was dismissed as Serbian propaganda. [ 146 ] Nevertheless, many people saw Western satellite broadcasts showing the ruined town and Serbian soldiers taking its inhabitants into custody. [ 158 ] When the surrender could no longer be denied, the two newspapers interpreted the loss as a demonstration of Croatian bravery and resistance, blaming the international community for not intervening to help Croatia. [ 146 ] The Croatian government was criticised for its approach to the battle. [ 146 ] Surviving defenders and right-wing political parties accused it of betrayal and of deliberately sacrificing Vukovar to secure international recognition for Croatia. The only explanation that many people were willing to accept for the town's fall was that it had been given up as part of a conspiracy. [ 159 ] The commanders of the Croatian forces in Vukovar, Mile Dedaković and Branko Borković, both survived the battle and spoke out publicly against the government's actions. In an apparent attempt to silence them, both men were briefly detained by Croatian military police, [ 91 ] and the Croatian government suppressed an issue of the newspaper Slobodni tjednik that published a transcript of a telephone call from Vukovar, in which Dedaković had pleaded with an evasive Tuđman for military assistance. The revelations caused public outrage and reinforced perceptions that the defenders had been betrayed. [ 160 ] From a military point of view, the outcome at Vukovar was not a disaster for Croatia's overall war effort. The battle broke the back of the JNA offensive and left Croatia's main adversary exhausted and unable to press its offensive deeper into the country. Vukovar was probably indefensible, being almost surrounded by Serb-held territory and closer to Belgrade than to Zagreb, and although the defeat was damaging to morale, in a strategic context the damage and delays inflicted on the JNA more than made up for the loss of the town. [ 91 ] Following the battle, Vukovar became a symbol of Croatian resistance and suffering. The survivors, veterans and journalists wrote numerous memoirs, songs and testimonies about the battle and its symbolism, calling it variously "the phenomenon", "the pride", "the hell" and "the Croatian knight". Writers appealed to the "Vukovar principle", the "spirituality of Vukovar" and "Vukovar ethics", the qualities said to have been exhibited by the defenders and townspeople. [ 159 ] Croatian war veterans were presented with medals bearing the name of Vukovar. [ 161 ] In 1994, when Croatia replaced the Yugoslav dinar with its new currency, the kuna , it used the destroyed Eltz Castle in Vukovar and the Vučedol Dove – an artefact from an ancient Neolithic culture centred on eastern Slavonia, which was discovered near Vukovar – on the new 20-kuna note. The imagery emphasises the Croatian nature of Vukovar, at the time under Serbian control. [ 162 ] During 1993–94 there was a national debate on how Vukovar should be rebuilt when it was recovered; some Croatians even proposed that it should be preserved as a monument. [ 161 ] The ruling HDZ made extensive use of popular culture relating to Vukovar as propaganda in the years before the region was reintegrated into Croatia. [ 163 ] In 1997 President Tuđman mounted a tour of eastern Slavonia, accompanied by a musical campaign called Sve hrvatske pobjede za Vukovar ("All Croatian victories for Vukovar"). The campaign was commemorated by the release of a compilation of patriotic music from Croatia Records . [ 164 ] When Vukovar was returned to Croatian control in 1998, its recovery was hailed as the completion of a long struggle for freedom and Croatian national identity. [ 165 ] Tuđman alluded to such sentiments when he gave a speech in Vukovar to mark its reintegration into Croatia: Our arrival in Vukovar – the symbol of Croatian suffering, Croatian resistance, Croatian aspirations for freedom, Croatian desire to return to its eastern borders on the Danube, of which the Croatian national anthem sings – is a sign of our determination to really achieve peace and reconciliation. [ 165 ] [ edit ] Serbian reaction The Yugoslavian flag hangs outside destroyed buildings in Vukovar Although the battle had been fought in the name of Serbian defence and unity, reactions in Serbia were deeply divided. The JNA, the state-controlled Serbian media and Serbian ultra-nationalists hailed the victory as a triumph. The JNA even erected a triumphal arch in Belgrade through which its returning soldiers could march, and officers were congratulated for taking "the toughest and fiercest Ustashe fortress". [ 166 ] The Serbian newspaper Politika ran a front-page headline on 20 November announcing: "Vukovar Finally Free". [ 155 ] In January 1992, from the ruins of Vukovar, the ultranationalist painter Milić Stanković wrote an article for the Serbian periodical Pogledi ("Viewpoints"), in which he declared: "Europe must know Vukovar was liberated from the Croat Nazis. They were helped by Central European scum. They crawled from under the papal tiara , as a dart of the serpent's tongue that protruded from the bloated Kraut and overstretched Eurocommunal anus." [ 167 ] The Serbian geographer Jovan Ilić set out a vision for the future of the region, envisaging it being annexed to Serbia and its expelled Croatian population being replaced with Serbs from elsewhere in Croatia. The redrawing of Serbia's borders would unite all Serbs in a single state, and would cure Croats of opposition to Serbian nationalism, which Ilić termed an "ethno-psychic disorder"; thus, "the new borders should primarily be a therapy for the treatment of ethno-psychic disorders, primarily among the Croatian population." Other Serbian nationalist writers acknowledged that historical evidence was that eastern Slavonia had been Croatian for centuries, but blamed the Croatian majority in the region on "conversion to Catholicism, Uniating and Croatisation" plus "genocidal destruction". Most irredentist propaganda focused on the region's proximity to Serbia and the large number of Serbs who inhabited the area. [ 168 ] The Croatian Serb leadership also took a positive view of the outcome. During the rule of the Republic of Serbian Krajina (RSK) between 1991 and 1995, the fall of Vukovar on 18 November 1991 was officially commemorated as "Liberation Day". It was portrayed as a successful struggle by local Serbs to defend their lives and property from the aggression of the Croatian state. Thousands of Vukovar's Serbs had suffered alongside their Croatian neighbours, sheltering in basements or bomb shelters for three months in appalling conditions, but after their "liberation" they were denigrated as the podrumaši , the "people from the basement". The Serb civilian dead were denied recognition, and the only people buried in the Serbian memorial cemetery at Vukovar were local Serbs who had fought with or alongside the JNA. [ 169 ] In contrast, many people in Serbia were strongly opposed to the battle and the wider war and resisted efforts by the state to involve them in the conflict. When the JNA tried to call up reservists, parents and relatives gathered around JNA barracks to prevent their children taking part in the operation. [ 170 ] Resistance to conscription became widespread across Serbia, ranging from individual acts of defiance to collective mutinies by hundreds of reservists at a time. Serbian opposition politicians condemned the war: Desimir Tošić of the Democratic Party accused Slobodan Milošević of "using the conflict to cling to power" and Vuk Drašković , leader of the Serbian Renewal Movement , appealed to JNA soldiers to "pick up their guns and run" from the front line. [ 171 ] After the fall of Vukovar he condemned what had been done in the name of Yugoslavia, writing in the daily newspaper Borba : I cannot applaud the Vukovar victory, which is so euphorically celebrated in the war propaganda of intoxicated Serbia. I cannot, for I won't violate the victims, thousands of dead, nor the pain and misfortune of all Vukovar survivors ... [Vukovar] is the Hiroshima of both Croatian and Serbian madness ... Everyone in this state, Serbs but especially Croats, have established days of the greatest shame and fall. [ 172 ] By late December 1991, just over a month after victory had been proclaimed in Vukovar, opinion polls found that 64 per cent wanted to end the war immediately and only 27 per cent were willing to continue the war. Milošević and other senior Serbian figures decided against continuing the fighting, as they saw it as politically impossible to mobilise more conscripts to fight in Croatia. Desertions from the JNA continued and the well-motivated and increasingly well-equipped Croatian Army was becoming increasingly difficult to counter. By the end of 1991, Serbian politicians and JNA leaders alike had concluded that it would be counter-productive to continue the war. The looming conflict in Bosnia also required the military resources tied up in Croatia to be freed for future use. [ 173 ] Although the battle was publicly portrayed as a triumph, behind the scenes it profoundly affected the JNA's character and leadership. The army's leaders realised that they had overestimated their ability to pursue operations against heavily defended urban targets. The central Croatian town of Gospić , for instance, was a strategic target of the JNA but was now assessed as potentially a "second Vukovar". The "Serbianisation" of the army was greatly accelerated, and by the end of 1991 it was estimated to be 90 per cent Serb. Its formerly pro-Communist, pan-Yugoslav identity was abandoned, and new officers were now advised to "love, above all else, their unit, their army, and their homeland – Serbia and Montenegro". The JNA's failure enabled the Serbian government to tighten its control over the military, whose leadership was purged and replaced with pro-Milošević nationalists. After the battle General Veljko Kadijević, commander of the JNA, was forced into retirement for "health reasons", and in early 1992 another thirty-eight generals and other officers were forced to retire, with several put on trial for incompetence and treason. [ 174 ] Many individual JNA soldiers who took part in the battle were revolted by what they had seen and protested to their superiors about the behaviour of the paramilitaries. Colonel Milorad Vučić later commented that "they simply do not want to die for such things". The slaughter that they witnessed at Vukovar led some to experience subsequent feelings of trauma and guilt. A JNA veteran told a journalist from the Arabic newspaper Asharq Al-Awsat : 'I was in the Army and I did my duty. Vukovar was more of a slaughter than a battle. Many women and children were killed. Many, many.' I asked him: 'Did you take part in the killing?' He answered: 'I deserted.' I asked him: 'But did you kill anyone?' He replied: 'I deserted after that ... The slaughter of Vukovar continues to haunt me. Every night I imagine that the war has reached my home and that my own children are being butchered.' [ 126 ] [ edit ] Other Yugoslav reaction In Bosnia and Herzegovina , President Alija Izetbegović made a televised appeal to Bosnian citizens to refuse the draft on the grounds that "this is not our war". He called it their "right and duty" to resist the "evil deeds" being committed in Croatia and said: "Let those who want it, wage it. We do not want this war." [ 95 ] When JNA troops transferred to the front via the Višegrad region of north-eastern Bosnia, local Bosnian Croats and Muslims set up barricades and machine-gun posts. They halted a column of 60 JNA tanks but were dispersed by force the following day. More than 1,000 people had to flee the area. This action, nearly seven months before the start of the Bosnian War , caused the first casualties of the Yugoslav Wars in Bosnia. [ 175 ] Macedonia's parliament adopted a declaration of independence from Yugoslavia in January 1991, but it did not take effect until a referendum in September 1991 confirmed it. A group of Macedonian JNA officers secretly sought to prevent soldiers from Macedonia being sent to Croatia, and busloads of soldiers' parents, funded by the Macedonian government, travelled to Montenegro to find their sons and bring them home. [ 176 ] Meanwhile, Macedonians continued to be conscripted into the JNA and serve in the war in Croatia. [ 176 ] The commander of JNA forces in the first phase of the battle, Gen. Aleksandar Spirkovski, was a Macedonian; his ethnicity was probably a significant factor in the decision to replace him with Života Panić, a Serb. [ 45 ] In 2005 the Macedonian Army's Chief of Staff, Gen. Miroslav Stojanovski, became the focus of international controversy after it was alleged that he had been involved in possible war crimes following the battle. [ 177 ] [ edit ] Occupation, restoration and reconstruction Vukovar suffered catastrophic damage in the battle. Croatian officials estimated that 90 per cent of Vukovar's housing stock was damaged or destroyed, [ 108 ] and put the cost at $2.5 billion. [ 178 ] The town barely recovered during its seven years under Serb control. [ 179 ] Marcus Tanner of The Independent described post-battle Vukovar as: a silent, ghostly landscape, consisting of mile upon mile of bricks, rusting cars, collapsed roofs, telegraph poles and timber beams poking out from the rubble. The wind whistles through the deserted warehouses along the river front. By next spring, grass and saplings will be sprouting and birds nesting in these piles, and hope of rebuilding will be over. [ 180 ] When Michael Ignatieff visited Vukovar in 1992, he found the inhabitants living in squalor: Such law and order as there is is administered by warlords. There is little gasoline, so ... everyone goes about on foot. Old peasant women forage for fuel in the woods, because there is no heating oil. Food is scarce, because the men are too busy fighting to tend the fields. In the desolate wastes in front of the bombed-out high rise flats, survivors dig at the ground with hoes. Every man goes armed. [ 181 ] The population increased to about 20,000 as Serb refugees from other parts of Croatia and Bosnia were relocated by RSK authorities. They initially lived without water or electricity, in damaged buildings patched up with plastic sheeting and wooden boards. [ 182 ] Residents scavenged the ruins for fragments of glass that they could stick back together to make windows for themselves. [ 183 ] The main sources of income were war profiteering and smuggling, though some were able to find jobs in eastern Slavonia's revived oil industry. [ 184 ] Reconstruction was greatly delayed by economic sanctions and lack of international aid. [ 185 ] Ruined buildings in the centre of Vukovar in 1991 (left) ; new construction and rebuilding under way in 2005 (right). After the Erdut Agreement was signed in 1995, the United Nations Transitional Authority for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) was established to enable the return of Croatian refugees and to prepare the region for reintegration into Croatia. This UN peacekeeping force provided security during the transition period between 1996 and 1998. [ 79 ] It was only in 1999 that Croats began returning to Vukovar in significant numbers, and many of the pre-war inhabitants never returned. By March 2001, the municipality was recorded as having 31,670 inhabitants – less than half the pre-war total – of whom 18,199 (57.46%) were Croats and 10,412 (32.88%) were Serbs. The community did not recover its mixed character: Croats and Serbs now lived separate social lives. Public facilities such as shops, cafés, restaurants, sports clubs, schools, non-governmental organisations and radio stations were re-established on segregated lines, with separate facilities for each community. [ 159 ] Although the Croatian government sponsored reconstruction efforts in and around Vukovar, the Serb-populated town centre remained in ruins until 2003. Both Croat and Serb residents believed the government had neglected it deliberately, in order to punish the Serb community. [ 79 ] Human Rights Watch noted that, of 4,000 homes that had been rebuilt, none of them were inhabited by Serbs. [ 186 ] Unemployment was high because of the destruction of the town's major industries, and many of the inhabitants could not sell their houses. [ 187 ] Most houses and many of Vukovar's historic buildings had been restored as of 2011. [ 188 ] [ edit ] Commemorations and memorials Memorial to the defenders of Vukovar at the confluence of the Danube and Vuka rivers Signs of the battle are still widely apparent in Vukovar, where many buildings remain visibly scarred by bullets and shrapnel. The riverside water tower has been preserved in its badly damaged state as a memorial. The town hospital presents an exhibition and reconstruction of the conditions in the building during the battle. At Ovčara, the site of the massacre is marked by a mass grave and exhibition about the atrocity. Local tourist guides, some of whom lived through the battle, offer tourists the opportunity to visit these and other sites on walking and bicycle tours. [ 189 ] Every November, Vukovar's authorities hold four days of festivities to commemorate the fall of the town, culminating in a "Procession of Memory" held on 18 November. This represents the expulsion of the town's Croatian inhabitants and involves a five-kilometre (3.1 mile) walk from the city's hospital to the Croatian Memorial Cemetery of Homeland War Victims. It is attended by tens of thousands of people from across Croatia. [ 190 ] Local Serbs have avoided participating in the Croatian commemorations, often preferring either to leave the town or stay indoors on 18 November. They have held a separate low-key commemoration at the Serbian military cemetery on 17 November, [ 191 ] until 2003 and on 18 November since then. The RSK-era term "Liberation Day" has been dropped, but the Serbs also avoid the Croatian terminology, instead calling it simply "18 November". [ 192 ] The issue of how to remember the Serbian dead has posed particular difficulties. Local Serbs who died fighting alongside the JNA were buried by the Croatian Serb authorities on a plot of land where Croatian houses had once stood. [ 191 ] The gravestones were originally topped with a sculptural evocation of the V-shaped Serbian military cap, or šajkača . After Vukovar's reintegration into Croatia the gravestones were repeatedly vandalised. The Serb community replaced them with more neutral gravestones without overt military connotations. [ 193 ] Vukovar Serbs report feeling marginalised and excluded from places associated with Croatian nationalist sentiment, such as monuments to the Croatian defenders. The Croatian sociologist Kruno Kardov gives the example of a prominent memorial, a large cross made from white stone, where the Vuka flows into the Danube. According to Kardov, Serbs rarely if ever go there, and they feel great stress if they do. A Serb boy spoke of how he wanted to know what was written on the monument but was too frightened to go and read the inscription; one day he got up the courage, ran to the monument, read it and immediately ran back to "safety". As Kardov puts it, Vukovar remains divided by an "invisible boundary line ... inscribed only on the cognitive map of the members of one particular group." [ 194 ] The battle is widely commemorated across Croatia. Almost every town has streets named after Vukovar, [ 161 ] and the lead vessel of the Croatian Navy 's two new Helsinki -class missile boats was named the Vukovar in January 2009. [ 195 ] The Croatian Parliament has declared 18 November to be the "Remembrance Day of the Sacrifice of Vukovar in 1991", when "all those who participated in the defence of the city of Vukovar – the symbol of Croatian freedom – are appropriately honoured with dignity." [ 161 ] As a symbol of Croatia's national identity, Vukovar has become a place of pilgrimage for people from across Croatia who seek to evoke feelings of "vicarious insideness", as Kruno Kardov described them, in the suffering endured during the country's war of independence. Some gather in front of the town's main memorial cross on New Year's Eve to pray as the year ends, though such sentiments have attracted criticism from local Croats for not allowing them to "rejoice for even a single night", as one put it. [ 191 ] The town has thus become, in Kardov's words, "the embodiment of a pure Croatian identity", and the battle "the foundational myth of the Croatian state". This has led to it becoming as much an "imagined place", a receptacle for Croatian national sentiment and symbolism, as a real place. Kardov concludes that it is questionable whether Vukovar can realise a vision of once again becoming "one place for all its citizens". [ 196 ] In November 2010 Boris Tadić became the first President of Serbia to travel to Vukovar, when he visited the massacre site at Ovčara and expressed his "apology and regret". [ 197 ] [ edit ] Films and books The battle was portrayed in the Serbian films Dezerter ("The Deserter") (1992), [ 198 ] Kaži zašto si me ostavio ("Why Have You Left Me?") (1993) [ 198 ] and Vukovar, jedna priča ("Vukovar: A Story") (1994); [ 199 ] in the Croatian films Vukovar se vraća kući ("Vukovar: The Way Home") (1994) [ 200 ] and Zapamtite Vukovar ("Remember Vukovar") (2008); and in the French film Harrison's Flowers (2000). [ 201 ] A 2006 Serbian documentary film about the battle, Vukovar – Final Cut , won the Human Rights Award at the 2006 Sarajevo Film Festival . [ 202 ] The battle is also at the centre of Serbian writer Vladimir Arsenijević 's 1995 novel U potpalublju ("In the Hold"). [ 203 ] [ edit ] Notes ^ a b Central Intelligence Agency Office of Russian and European Analysis 2000 , p. 99 ^ Woodward 1995 , p. 258 ^ a b c d e f g Central Intelligence Agency Office of Russian and European Analysis 2000 , p. 100 ^ a b c Šebetovsky 2002 , p. 11 ^ a b Sikavica, 28 November 1997 ^ a b Virski list , November 2008 ^ Central Intelligence Agency Office of Russian and European Analysis 2000 , p. 205 ^ a b Kardov 2007 , p. 64 ^ a b c d Horton 2003 , p. 132 ^ Notholt 2008 , p. 7.28 ^ Borger, 2011 ^ a b Turković, Hovens & Gregurek 2004 , p. 222 ^ a b Prosecutor v. Milosevic , 23 October 2002 ^ Prosecutor v. Mrkšić, Radić & Šljivančanin – Judgement , 27 September 2007 , p. 8. ^ Ivančević 1986 , p. 157 ^ Gow 2003 , pp. 159–60 ^ Bjelajac & Žunec 2009 , p. 249 ^ BBC News, 28 January 2003 ^ Cvitanic 2011 , p. 107 ^ Goldman 1997 , p. 310 ^ a b Boduszyński 2010 , pp. 79–80 ^ a b Bassiouni, Annex IV. 28 December 1994 ^ Bell 2003 , p. 180 ^ a b O'Shea 2005 , p. 11 ^ Bassiouni, Annex III. 28 December 1994 ^ Hockenos 2003 , pp. 58–59 ^ Stefanovic, 4 May 1991 ^ a b Thomas & Mikulan 2006 , p. 46 ^ Tanner, 3 May 1991 ^ Sudetic, 27 August 1991 ^ Sremac 1999 , p. 47 ^ Tanner, 6 May 1991 ^ Tanner, 20 May 1991 ^ Sudetic, 20 May 1991 ^ Stankovic, 20 June 1991 ^ BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, 9 July 1991 ^ Jelinić, 31 July 2006 ^ Stover 2007 , p. 146 ^ Woodward 1995 , p. 492 ^ Lekic, 24 July 1991 ^ Ramet 2005 , pp. 230–231 ^ Ramet 2006 , p. 391 ^ Coward 2009 , p. 37 ^ a b c d Prosecutor v. Mrkšić, Radić & Šljivančanin – Judgement , 27 September 2007 , p. 14. ^ a b c Central Intelligence Agency Office of Russian and European Analysis 2000 , p. 195 ^ a b Thompson 1992 , p. 300 ^ a b Marijan 2002 , p. 370 ^ a b Sikavica 2000 , p. 144 ^ a b Slobodna Dalmacija , 26 September 2009 ^ Malović & Selnow 2001 , p. 132 ^ a b Gow 2003 , p. 239 ^ a b Butković, 2010 ^ a b Merrill 1999 , p. 119 ^ Nation 2003 , p. 117 ^ a b c d Tus 2001 , p. 54 ^ a b c d e Tus 2001 , p. 60 ^ a b c Prosecutor v. Mrkšić, Radić & Šljivančanin – Judgement , 27 September 2007 , p. 16. ^ a b Šebetovsky 2002 , p. 12 ^ Armatta 2010 , p. 193 ^ Kelly 2005 , p. 106 ^ a b c Central Intelligence Agency Office of Russian and European Analysis 2000 , p. 92 ^ Sell 2002 , p. 334 ^ a b c Gibbs 2009 , pp. 88–89 ^ Central Intelligence Agency Office of Russian and European Analysis 2000 , pp. 97–98 ^ Gibbs 2009 , p. 252 ^ Armatta 2010 , p. 192 ^ a b c Little & Silber 1997 , p. 176 ^ Little & Silber 1997 , p. 175 ^ a b Tanner 2010 , p. 264 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , pp. 23–24 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , p. 19 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , p. 25 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , pp. 26–27 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , p. 20 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , p. 21 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , p. 28 ^ Jutarnji list , 6 July 2007 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , pp. 34–37 ^ a b c Stover & Weinstein 2004 , p. 8 ^ Bell, 11 September 2011 , 05:06 ^ Central Intelligence Agency Office of Russian and European Analysis 2000 , p. 98 ^ Sikavica 2000 , p. 151 ^ Sikavica 2000 , p. 143 ^ Collin 2001 , p. 48 ^ Sikavica 2000 , p. 152 ^ Doder & Branson 1999 , p. 97 ^ Armatta 2010 , pp. 186–187 ^ Doder & Branson 1999 , pp. 98–99 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , pp. 9–10 ^ a b Armatta 2010 , p. 188 ^ a b c d e f g h Central Intelligence Agency Office of Russian and European Analysis 2000 , p. 101 ^ a b Tus 2001 , p. 55 ^ Little & Silber 1997 , p. 177 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , p. 39 ^ a b Tus 2001 , p. 58 ^ Hrvatski vojnik , May 2007 ^ a b Little & Silber 1997 , p. 179 ^ Ramet 2005 , p. 24 ^ Šebetovsky 2002 , pp. 27–28 ^ a b c d e f Nazor, November 2008 ^ Champion, 20 November 1991 ^ Radin, 26 November 1991 ^ Bell, 11 September 2011 , 11:52 ^ Harden, 20 November 1991 ^ a b Sudetic, 21 November 1991 ^ a b c d e Little & Silber 1997 , p. 180 ^ Champion, 24 November 1991 ^ a b O'Shea 2005 , p. 23 ^ Cigar 1996 , p. 77 ^ Cigar 1996 , p. 78 ^ Cvitanic 2011 , p. 34 ^ Klain 1998 , p. 286 ^ Nizich 1992 , p. 53 ^ Gow 2003 , p. 163 ^ Prosecutor v. Milošević , 23 October 2002 , #55. ^ a b Prosecutor v. Mrkšić, Radić & Šljivančanin – Judgement , 27 September 2007 , p. 67. ^ Prosecutor v. Šešelj , 7 December 2007 , p. 8. ^ Armatta 2010 , p. 194 ^ Vjesnik , 14 September 2011 ^ Jutarnji list , 16 May 2006 ^ Croatian Radiotelevision, 4 June 2010 ^ a b Simmons, 17 December 1991 ^ MacDonald 2002 , p. 203 ^ Prosecutor v. Mrkšić, Radić & Šljivančanin – Judgement , 27 September 2007 , p. 100. ^ Central Intelligence Agency Office of Russian and European Analysis 2000 , p. 216 ^ a b Cigar 1996 , pp. 74–75 ^ Kroeger, 12 December 2001 ^ The Economist , 4 March 1995 ^ BBC News, 27 September 2007 ^ BBC News, 5 May 2009 ^ Agence France-Presse, 7 July 2011 ^ BBC News, 29 June 1998 ^ BBC News, 24 February 2003 ^ BBC News, 1 June 2004 ^ BBC News, 12 December 2005 ^ BBC News, 15 January 2000 ^ BBC News, 11 March 2006 ^ Prosecutor v. Hadžić . 21 May 2004 ^ BBC News, 24 August 2011 ^ Jelinić, 26 November 2007 ^ Voice of America News, 22 September 2011 ^ The Economist , 4 March 2011 ^ Kurspahić 2003 , p. 74 ^ Kurspahić 2003 , p. 75 ^ Kolstø 2009 , p. 73 ^ a b c d Kolstø 2009 , p. 74 ^ Kolstø 2009 , p. 75 ^ Milošević 2000 , pp. 120–121 ^ Brown & Karim 1995 , pp. 122–123 ^ Tanner, 19 November 1992 ^ Kurspahić 2003 , pp. 77–78 ^ Štitković 2000 , p. 172 ^ Karadjis 2000 , pp. 58–60 ^ Shawcross 2001 , p. 46 ^ a b Kurspahić 2003 , p. 79 ^ Glenny 1999 , p. 103 ^ a b Tanner 2010 , p. 265 ^ Navarro, 20 November 1991 ^ a b c Kardov 2007 , p. 65 ^ Malović & Selnow 2001 , p. 134 ^ a b c d Kardov 2007 , p. 66 ^ Kaiser 1995 , p. 118 ^ Baker 2010 , p. 22 ^ Baker 2010 , p. 44 ^ a b Kardov 2007 , p. 67 ^ Sikavica 2000 , p. 145 ^ Stankovic, 17 January 1992 ^ MacDonald 2002 , p. 81 ^ Kardov 2007 , pp. 70–71 ^ Armatta 2010 , p. 187 ^ Stojanović 2000 , p. 474 ^ Thomas 1999 , p. 108 ^ Cigar 1996 , pp. 40–42 ^ Cigar 1996 , p. 79 ^ Ramet 2006 , p. 416 ^ a b Phillips 2004 , pp. 49–50 ^ BBC News, 25 November 2005 ^ Marshall, 16 January 1998 ^ Bjelajac & Žunec 2009 , p. 262 ^ Tanner, 27 October 1992 ^ Ignatieff 1993 , p. 34 ^ Lekic, 18 November 1992 ^ Kovacic, 18 November 1992 ^ Maguire, 4 July 1994 ^ Marshall, 8 March 1995 ^ Human Rights Watch 2003 , p. 45 ^ Tanner 2010 , p. 306 ^ Radosavljevic, 20 July 2011 ^ Johnson 2011 , pp. 52–53 ^ Kardov 2007 , p. 79 ^ a b c Kardov 2007 , p. 81 ^ Kardov 2007 , p. 87–88 ^ Kardov 2007 , pp. 71–73 ^ Kardov 2007 , pp. 75–76 ^ Jane's Navy International , 30 January 2009 ^ Kardov 2007 , p. 81–82 ^ BBC News, 4 November 2010 ^ a b Daković 2010 , p. 471 ^ Goulding 2002 , p. 189 ^ Iordanova 2001 , p. 142 ^ Sloan 2007 , p. 268 ^ B92, 27 August 2006 ^ Lukić 2010 , p. 257 [ edit ] References Books Armatta, Judith (2010). Twilight of Impunity: The War Crimes Trial of Slobodan Milošević . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. ISBN 9780822347460 . Baker, Catherine (2010). Sounds of the Borderland: Popular Music, War and Nationalism in Croatia Since 1991 . Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate Publishing Ltd. ISBN 9781409403371 . Bell, Imogen, ed. (2003). Central and South-Eastern Europe 2004 . London: Europa Publications. ISBN 9781857431865 . Bjelajac, Mile; Žunec, Ozren (2009). "The War in Croatia, 1991–1995". In Ingrao, Charles W. Confronting The Yugoslav Controversies: A Scholars' Initiative . West Lafayette, Indiana: Purdue University Press. ISBN 9781557535337 . Boduszyński, Mieczysław P. (2010). Regime Change in the Yugoslav Successor States: Divergent Paths Toward a New Europe . Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 9780801894299 . Brown, Cynthia G.; Karim, Farhad, eds. (1995). Playing the "Communal Card": Communal Violence and Human Rights . New York City: Human Rights Watch. ISBN 9781564321527 . Central Intelligence Agency Office of Russian and European Analysis (2000). Balkan Battlegrounds: A Military History of the Yugoslav Conflict, 1990–1995: Volume 1 . Washington, D.C.: Central Intelligence Agency. ISBN 9780160664724 . Cigar, Norman (1996). "The Serbo-Croatian War, 1991". In Meštrović, Stjepan Gabriel. Genocide after Emotion: The Post-Emotional Balkan War . London: Routledge. ISBN 9780415122931 . Collin, Matthew (2001). This Is Serbia Calling: Rock 'n' Roll Radio and Belgrade's Underground Resistance . London: Serpent's Tail. ISBN 9781852426828 . Coward, Martin (2009). Urbicide: The Politics of Urban Destruction . London: Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9780415461313 . Cvitanic, Marilyn (2011). Culture and Customs of Croatia . Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9780313351174 . Daković, Nevena (2010). "Remembrances of the Past and the Present". In Cornis-Pope, Marcel; Neubauer, John. History of the Literary Cultures of East-Central Europe . Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. ISBN 9789027234582 . Doder, Dusko; Branson, Louise (1999). Milosevic: Portrait of a Tyrant . New York City: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9780684843087 . Goldman, Minton F. (1997). Revolution and change in Central and Eastern Europe: political, economic, and social challenges . Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 9781563247583 . Gibbs, David N. (2009). First Do No Harm: Humanitarian Intervention and the Destruction of Yugoslavia . Nashville, Tennessee: Vanderbilt University Press. ISBN 9780826516442 . Glenny, Misha (1999). The Fall of Yugoslavia: The Third Balkan War . London: Penguin Books. ISBN 9780140257717 . Gow, James (2003). The Serbian Project and Its Adversaries: A Strategy of War Crimes . London: C. Hurst & Co. ISBN 9781850654995 . Goulding, Daniel (2002). Liberated Cinema: The Yugoslav Experience, 1945–2001 . Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press. ISBN 9780253215826 . Hockenos, Paul (2003). Homeland Calling: Exile Patriotism and the Balkan Wars . Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. ISBN 9780801441585 . Horton, Richard C. (2003). Second Opinion: Doctors, Diseases and Decisions in Modern Medicine . London: Granta Books. ISBN 9781862075870 . Human Rights Watch (2003). Broken Promises : impediments to refugee return in Croatia . New York City: Human Rights Watch. OCLC 52983733 . Ignatieff, Michael (1993). Blood & Belonging : Journeys Into the New Nationalism . London: BBC Books. ISBN 9780563369677 . Iordanova, Dina (2001). Cinema of Flames: Balkan Film, Culture and the Media . London: British Film Institute. ISBN 9780851708485 . Ivančević, Radovan (1986). Art Treasures of Croatia . Belgrade, Yugoslavia: IRO Motovun. OCLC 18052634 . Johnson, Tony (2011). "Thanatourism and the commodification of space in post-war Croatia and Bosnia". In Sharpley, Richard; Stone, Philip R. Tourist Experience: Contemporary Perspectives . London: Routledge. ISBN 9780415572781 . Kaiser, Timothy (1995). "Archaeology and ideology in southeast Europe". In Kohl, Philip L; Fawcett, Clare P. Nationalism, Politics and the Practice of Archaeology . Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521558396 . Karadjis, Mike (2000). Bosnia, Kosova & the West . Sydney, Australia: Resistance Books. ISBN 9781876646059 . Kardov, Kruno (2007). "Remember Vukovar". In Ramet, Sabrina P; Matić, Davorka. Democratic Transition in Croatia: Value Transformation, Education, and Media . College Station, Texas: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 9781585445875 . Kelly, Michael J (2005). Nowhere to Hide: Defeat of the Sovereign Immunity Defense for Crimes of Genocide and the Trials of Slobodan Milošević and Saddam Hussein . New York City: Peter Lang. ISBN 9780820478357 . Klain, Eduard (1998). "Intergenerational Aspects of the Conflict in the Former Yugoslavia". In Danieli, Yael. International Handbook of Multigenerational Legacies of Trauma . New York City: Springer. ISBN 9780306457388 . Kolstø, Pål (2009). Media Discourse and the Yugoslav Conflicts: Representations of Self and Other . Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate Publishing Ltd. ISBN 9780754676294 . Kurspahić, Kemal (2003). Prime Time Crime: Balkan Media in War and Peace . Washington, D.C.: US Institute of Peace Press. ISBN 9781929223398 . Little, Allan ; Silber, Laura (1997). Yugoslavia: Death of a Nation . London: Penguin. ISBN 9780140262636 . Lukić, Jasmina (2010). "Gender and War in South Slavic Literature". In Cornis-Pope, Marcel; Neubauer, John. History of the Literary Cultures of East-Central Europe . Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. ISBN 9789027234582 . MacDonald, David Bruce (2002). Balkan Holocausts?: Serbian and Croatian Victim Centered Propaganda and the War in Yugoslavia . Manchester: Manchester University Press. ISBN 9780719064678 . Malović, Stjepan; Selnow, Gary W. (2001). The People, Press, and Politics of Croatia . Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 9780275965433 . Merrill, Christopher (1999). Only the Nails Remain: Scenes from the Balkan Wars . Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 9780742516861 . Milošević, Milan (2000). "The Media Wars: 1987–1997". In Ridgeway, James; Udovički, Jasminka. Burn This House: The Making and Unmaking of Yugoslavia . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. ISBN 9780822325901 . Nation, R. Craig (2003). War in the Balkans, 1991–2002 . Carlisle, Pennsylvania: Strategic Studies Institute. ISBN 9781584871347 . Nizich, Ivana (1992). War Crimes in Bosnia-Hercegovina, Volume 2 . New York City: Human Rights Watch. ISBN 9781564320834 . Notholt, Stuart (2008). Fields of Fire : An atlas of ethnic conflict . London: Troubador Publishing Ltd. ISBN 9781906510473 . O'Shea, Brendan (2005). The Modern Yugoslav Conflict 1991–1995: Perception, Deception and Dishonesty . London: Routledge. ISBN 9780415357050 . Phillips, John (2004). Macedonia: Warlords & Rebels in the Balkans . London: I.B.Tauris. ISBN 9781860648410 . Ramet, Sabrina P. (2005). Thinking about Yugoslavia: Scholarly Debates about the Yugoslav Breakup and the Wars in Bosnia and Kosovo . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521851510 . Ramet, Sabrina P. (2006). The Three Yugoslavias: State-Building and Legitimation, 1918–2005 . Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press. ISBN 9780253346568 . Sell, Louis (2002). Slobodan Milošević and the Destruction of Yugoslavia . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. ISBN 9780822332237 . Shawcross, William (2001). Deliver Us from Evil : Warlords and peacekeepers in a world of endless conflict . London: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 9780747553120 . Sikavica, Stipe (2000). "The Army's Collapse". In Ridgeway, James; Udovički, Jasminka. Burn This House: The Making and Unmaking of Yugoslavia . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. ISBN 9780822325901 . Sloan, Joan (2007). Reel Women: An International Directory of Contemporary Feature Films About Women . Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 9780810857384 . Štitković, Ejup (2000). "Croatia: The First War". In Ridgeway, James; Udovički, Jasminka. Burn This House: The Making and Unmaking of Yugoslavia . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. ISBN 9780822325901 . Stojanović, Dubravka (2000). "The Traumatic Circle of the Serbian Opposition". In Popov, Nebojša. The Road to War in Serbia: Trauma and Catharsis . Budapest: Central European University Press. ISBN 9789639116566 . Stover, Eric; Weinstein, Harvey M (2004). My Neighbor, My Enemy: Justice and Community in the Aftermath of Mass Atrocity . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521542647 . Stover, Eric (2007). The Witnesses: War Crimes and the Promise of Justice in the Hague . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 9780812219944 . Sremac, Danielle S (1999). War of Words: Washington Tackles the Yugoslav Conflict . Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 9780275966096 . Tanner, Marcus (2010). Croatia: A Nation Forged in War . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300163940 . Thomas, Nigel; Mikulan, Krunoslav (2006). The Yugoslav Wars (1): Slovenia & Croatia 1991–95 . Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 9781841769639 . Thomas, Robert (1999). Serbia under Milošević: Politics in the 1990s . London: C. Hurst & Co. Publishers. ISBN 9781850653417 . Thompson, Mark (1992). A Paper House: The Ending of Yugoslavia . London: Hutchinson Radius. ISBN 9780091746193 . Turković, Silvana; Hovens, Johannes E; Gregurek, Rudolf (2004). "Strengthening Psychological Health in War Victims and Refugees". In Wilson, John Preston; Drožđek, Boris. Broken Spirits: The Treatment of Traumatized Asylum Seekers, Refugees, and War and Torture Victims . New York City: Routledge. ISBN 9780415943970 . Tus, Anton (2001). "The war up to the Sarajevo Ceasefire". In Magaš, Branko; Žanić, Ivo. The War in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina 1991–1995 . London: Frank Cass Publishers. ISBN 0714682012 . Woodward, Susan L. (1995). Balkan Tragedy: Chaos and Dissolution after the Cold War . Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. ISBN 9780815795131 . News reports Bell, Martin (22 August 2011). "Return to Vukovar" . BBC Radio 4 . http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b013f0xr/Return_to_Vukovar/ . Retrieved 11 September 2011 . Borger, Julian (3 August 2011). "The hunt for the former Yugoslavia's war criminals: mission accomplished" . guardian.co.uk . http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/aug/03/former-yugoslavia-war-crimes-hunt . Retrieved 22 October 2011 . Champion, Marc (20 November 1991). "UN envoy inspects ruins of Vukovar". The Independent (London, UK): p. 12. Champion, Marc (24 November 1991). "The slow death of Vukovar". Independent on Sunday : p. 12. "War crimes in ex-Yugoslavia – Another Arrest" . The Economist . 4 March 2011 . http://www.economist.com/blogs/easternapproaches/2011/03/war_crimes_ex-yugoslavia . Harden, Blaine (20 November 1991). "Battered Vukovar Bares Its Wounds; Danube River City Is Reduced to Ruins in Yugoslav Civil War". Washington Post : p. A01. "Nebeski vitezovi slavonske ravni [The celestial knights of the Slavonian plain]" (in Croatian). Hrvatski vojnik (136). May 2007 . http://www.hrvatski-vojnik.hr/hrvatski-vojnik/1362007/FILM.asp . Retrieved 1 October 2011 . Jelinić, Berislav (31 July 2006). "Suljic dying, statement against Mercep impossible" . Nacional (Zagreb, Croatia) (628) . http://www.nacional.hr/en/clanak/26774/suljic-dying-statement-against-mercep-impossible . Jelinić, Berislav (26 November 2007). "Bajic's greatest weapon against war criminals" . Nacional (Zagreb, Croatia) (559) . http://www.nacional.hr/en/clanak/40411/bajics-greatest-weapon-against-war-criminals . Kovacic, Jovan (18 November 1992). "Vukovar marks anniversary in defiance and disappointment". Reuters. Kroeger, Alix (12 December 2001). "Croatia's precious artwork returned" . BBC News . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/1706658.stm . Retrieved 12 September 2011 . Lekic, Slobodan (24 July 1991). "Bumper Crops Stands in Middle of Warring Militias". The Associated Press. Lekic, Slobodan (18 November 1992). "Serbs Celebrate Anniversary of Vukovar Takeover". The Associated Press. Maguire, Sean (4 July 1994). "Serbs defy all to begin rebuilding Vukovar". Reuters. Marshall, Andrew (16 January 1998). "Balkans: Remember Vukovar – for the sake of the dead, and the survivors who must bring it back to life" . The Independent (London, UK): p. 15 . http://www.independent.co.uk/news/balkans-remember-vukovar--for-the-sake-of-the-dead-and-the-survivors-who-must-bring-it-back-to-life-1138902.html . Retrieved 24 November 2010 . Marshall, Tyler (8 March 1995). "Serbs Dig In to Defend Croatian City They Destroyed". Los Angeles Times : p. A14. Navarro, Alain (20 November 1991). "Croatians shocked at loss of Vukovar". Agence France-Presse. Nazor, Ante (November 2008). "Grad je bio meta [The city was the target]" (in Croatian). Hrvatski vojnik (215) . http://www.hrvatski-vojnik.hr/hrvatski-vojnik/2152008/gradmeta.asp . Retrieved 9 October 2011 . Radin, Charles A. (26 November 1991). "Reflecting on a battle's losses: Fallen Croatian city's restless defenders rue past and wonder what's next". The Boston Globe : p. 2. Radosavljevic, Zoran (20 July 2011). "Still hurting, Vukovar seeks closure after Hadzic's arrest" . Reuters . http://www.trust.org/alertnet/news/still-hurting-vukovar-seeks-closure-after-hadzics-arrest/ . Sikavica, Stipe (28 November 1997). "Dead Warriors Mislaid in Political Haze" . AIM Belgrade . http://www.aimpress.ch/dyn/trae/archive/data/199711/71128-026-trae-beo.htm . Retrieved 5 September 2011 . Simmons, Michael (17 December 1991). "Napalm used in pounding of Vukovar, says doctor". The Guardian (London, UK): p. 8. Stankovic, Mirko (20 June 1991). "Tense situation in Vukovar". Summary of World Broadcasts (BBC). Stanković, Milić (17 January 1992). "Hrvatsko ludilo i Pandorina kutija [Croatian madness and Pandora's box]" (in Serbian). Pogledi (Kragujevac, Serbia: NIP Pogledi d.o.o.): p. 25. Stefanovic, Ivan (4 May 1991). "Another Person Killed in Ethnic Clashes, Federal Presidency Convened". The Associated Press. Sudetic, Chuck (20 May 1991). "Croatia Votes for Sovereignty and Confederation" . The New York Times : p. A3 . http://www.nytimes.com/1991/05/20/world/croatia-votes-for-sovereignty-and-confederation.html?ref=croatia . Retrieved 12 December 2010 . Sudetic, Chuck (27 August 1991). "Attacks on Croatia Called Worst of War" . The New York Times . http://www.nytimes.com/1991/08/27/world/attacks-on-croatia-called-worst-of-war.html . Sudetic, Chuck (21 November 1991). "Croatian Cityscape: Stray Dogs, Rows of Wounded, Piles of Dead" . The New York Times : p. A1 . http://www.nytimes.com/1991/11/21/world/croatian-cityscape-stray-dogs-rows-of-wounded-piles-of-dead.html . Tanner, Marcus (3 May 1991). "'35 killed' in Croatian clashes". The Independent (London, UK): p. 14. Tanner, Marcus (6 May 1991). "Hatred rages out of control in Croatia". The Independent (London, UK): p. 10. Tanner, Marcus (20 May 1991). "Croats likely to vote for independence". The Independent (London, UK): p. 9. Tanner, Marcus (19 November 1992). "Macabre rite to celebrate a Serb conquest". The Independent (London, UK): p. 9. Tanner, Marcus (27 October 1992). "A ravaged city that lost its desire to live: Marcus Tanner visits once-wealthy Vukovar a year after the Yugoslav army overwhelmed the city and destroyed its mixed community" . The Independent (London, UK): p. 8 . http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/a-ravaged-city-that-lost-its-desire-to-live-marcus-tanner-visits-oncewealthy-vukovar-a-year-after-the-yugoslav-army-overwhelmed-the-city-and-destroyed-its-mixed-community-1559818.html . Retrieved 10 September 2011 . "War Crimes Court Orders Serb Major's Early Release". Agence France-Presse. 7 July 2011. Croatian Radio (9 July 1991). "Vukovar police report terrorist arrests". Summary of World Broadcasts (BBC). "Croatian Serb war crimes suspect found dead" . BBC News. 29 June 1998 . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/122328.stm . Retrieved 3 September 2011 . Wood, Paul (15 January 2000). "Gangster's life of Serb warlord" . BBC News . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/605266.stm . Retrieved 16 September 2011 . "Serbia votes to end Yugoslavia" . BBC News. 28 January 2003 . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/2700243.stm . Retrieved 7 October 2011 . "The charges against Vojislav Seselj" . BBC News. 24 February 2003 . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/2795235.stm . Retrieved 3 September 2011 . "Vukovar war crimes trial halted" . BBC News. 1 June 2004 . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/3765199.stm . Retrieved 3 September 2011 . "Army chief faces Vukovar inquiry" . BBC News Online . 25 November 2005 . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/4472382.stm . Retrieved 5 September 2011 . "Serbs jailed for Vukovar massacre" . BBC News. 12 December 2005 . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/4521520.stm . Retrieved 3 September 2011 . "Milosevic found dead in his cell" . BBC News. 11 March 2006 . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/4796470.stm . Retrieved 2 September 2011 . "Two jailed over Croatia massacre" . BBC News. 27 September 2007 . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/7016290.stm . Retrieved 3 September 2011 . "Hague triples Vukovar jail term" . BBC News. 5 May 2009 . http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/8033635.stm . Retrieved 3 September 2011 . "Serb leader Tadic apologises for 1991 Vukovar massacre" . BBC News. 4 November 2010 . http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-11689153 . Retrieved 7 September 2011 . "Vukovar suspect Goran Hadzic pleads not guilty" . BBC News. 24 August 2011 . http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-14652784 . Retrieved 2 September 2011 . Butković, Davor (6 November 2010). "I Srbi su branili Hrvatsku [Serbs defended Croatia, too]" (in Croatian). Jutarnji list . http://www.jutarnji.hr/davor-butkovic--i-srbi-su-branili-hrvatsku/901195/ . Retrieved 19 October 2011 . "Post-communist vandalism; art treasures are being destroyed in the Balkans – by soldiers in what used to be Yugoslavia and by spivs in Albania". The Economist : p. 83. 4 March 1995. "Silovanja kao ratni zločin [Rape as a war crime]" (in Croatian). Hrvatska radiotelevizija ( Croatian Radiotelevision ). 4 June 2010 . http://www.hrt.hr/index.php?id=48&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=75760&tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=38&cHash=42ebfa3d5b . Retrieved 15 September 2011 . "Croatia names Vukovar-class FAC acquired from Finland" . Jane's Navy International ( Jane's Information Group ). 30 January 2009 . http://articles.janes.com/articles/Janes-Navy-International-2009/Croatia-names-Vukovar-class-FAC-acquired-from-Finland.html . "Počelo prvo javno suđenje za silovanje u okupiranom Vukovaru [The first public trial for rape in occupied Vukovar begins]" (in Croatian). Jutarnji list . 16 May 2006 . http://www.jutarnji.hr/pocelo-prvo-javno-sudenje-za-silovanje-u-okupiranom-vukovaru/149706/ . Retrieved 15 September 2011 . "Umro Marko Babić – odlazak heroja s Trpinjske ceste [Marko Babić died – the departure of the Trpinjska cesta hero]" (in Croatian). Jutarnji list . 6 July 2007 . http://www.jutarnji.hr/umro-marko-babic---odlazak-heroja-s-trpinjske-ceste/181177/ . Retrieved 16 September 2011 . "Naša domovina – I Jovan je branio Hrvatsku [Our homeland – Jovan defended Croatia, too]" (in Croatian). Slobodna Dalmacija . 26 October 2009 . http://www.slobodnadalmacija.hr/Spektar/tabid/94/articleType/ArticleView/articleId/71670/Default.aspx . Retrieved 17 September 2011 . "Vukovar 1991. i sedamnaest godina poslije [Vukovar in 1991 and seventeen years later]" (in Croatian). Virski list ( Vir , Croatia: Vir turizam d.o.o.): p. 19. November 2008. "Naši silovatelji slobodno šeću Vukovarom, a mi smo zaboravljene [Our rapists freely roam Vukovar, and we are forgotten]" (in Croatian). Vjesnik . 14 September 2011 . http://www.vjesnik.hr/Article.aspx?ID=698CE4D1-DC27-4E80-BCAD-A997BA10DFE2 . Retrieved 15 September 2011 . "Croatian President Says No Innocents Will Be Convicted of War Crimes" . Voice of America News. 22 September 2011 . http://www.voanews.com/english/news/europe/Croatian-President-Says-No-Innocents-Will-Be-Convicted-of-War-Crimes-130369768.html . Retrieved 22 September 2011 . Other sources Bassiouni, M. Cherif (28 December 1994). "Final report of the United Nations Commission of Experts established pursuant to security council resolution 780 (1992), Annex III – Special Forces" . United Nations . http://www.ess.uwe.ac.uk/comexpert/anx/III-A.htm#IV.B.21 . Retrieved 19 March 2011 . Bassiouni, M. Cherif (28 December 1994). "Final report of the United Nations Commission of Experts established pursuant to security council resolution 780 (1992), Annex IV – The policy of ethnic cleansing" . United Nations . http://www.ess.uwe.ac.uk/comexpert/anx/IV.htm . Retrieved 19 March 2011 . ""Vukovar – poslednji rez" osvojio nagradu u Sarajevu ["Vukovar – Final Cut" wins award in Sarajevo]" (in Serbian). Belgrade, Serbia: B92. 27 August 2006 . http://www.b92.net/specijal/vukovar/human_rights_award.php . Retrieved 8 October 2011 . Marijan, Davor (October 2002). "Bitka za Vukovar 1991 [The Battle of Vukovar, 1991]" (in Croatian) (PDF). Scrinia Slavonica ( Slavonski Brod : Croatian Historical Institute - Department of History of Slavonia, Srijem and Baranja) 2 (1): 367–402. ISSN 1332-4853 . http://hrcak.srce.hr/index.php?show=clanak&id_clanak_jezik=17413&lang=en . Retrieved 6 October 2011 . Šebetovsky, Mario (July 2002). "The Battle of Vukovar: The Battle That Saved Croatia" (PDF). Quantico, VA: United States Marine Corps Command and Staff College, Marine Corps University . http://www.hsdl.org/?abstract&did=451027 . Retrieved 9 October 2011 . "The Prosecutor of the Tribunal against Goran Hadzic – Indictment" . International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. 21 May 2004 . http://www.icty.org/x/cases/hadzic/ind/en/had-ii040716e.htm . Retrieved 2 September 2011 . "The Prosecutor of the Tribunal against Slobodan Milošević – Second Amended Indictment" . International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. 23 October 2002 . http://www.icty.org/x/cases/slobodan_milosevic/ind/en/mil-2ai020728e.htm . Retrieved 2 September 2011 . "Prosecutor v. Mile Mrkšić, Miroslav Radić and Veselin Šljivančanin – Judgement" . International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. 27 September 2007 . http://www.icty.org/x/cases/mrksic/tjug/en/070927.pdf . Retrieved 23 August 2011 . "The Prosecutor of the Tribunal against Vojislav Šešelj – Third Amended Indictment" . International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. 7 December 2007 . http://www.icty.org/x/cases/seselj/ind/en/seslj3rdind071207e.pdf . Retrieved 3 September 2011 . [ edit ] External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Battle of Vukovar Vukovar – Final Cut – Producer's announcement of the 2006 documentary film Images from Vukovar after the fall by Ron Haviv v t e Yugoslav wars Overview Timeline Participants People Wars and conflicts Slovenian War of Independence (1991) Croatian War of Independence (1991–95) War in Bosnia and Herzegovina (1991/1992–95) Croat–Bosniak War (1992–94) Background: Timeline of Yugoslav breakup Josip Broz Tito Brotherhood and unity League of Communists of Yugoslavia Croatian spring SANU Memorandum Contributions for the Slovenian National Program Anti-bureaucratic revolution JBTZ-trial Gazimestan speech Breakup of Yugoslavia Karađorđevo agreement Graz agreement Joint Criminal Enterprise Role of the media in the Yugoslav wars Consequences: Brioni Agreement Dayton Agreement Agreement on Sub-Regional Arms Control ICTY List of ICTY indictees Human rights in Croatia Human rights in Serbia Articles on nationalism: Ethnic cleansing Greater Albania Greater Croatia Greater Serbia Anti-Serb sentiment Croatian nationalism Serbian nationalism 1990 Log Revolution 1991 Pakrac clash Plitvice Lakes incident Borovo Selo killings Dalmatian anti-Serb riots Ten-Day War Operation Coast-91 Dalj massacre Battle of Vukovar Vukovar massacre Battle of the Barracks Lovas massacre Široka Kula massacre Gospić massacre Baćin massacre Saborsko massacre Siege of Dubrovnik Operation Otkos 10 Škabrnja massacre Erdut massacre Operation Orkan 91 Bruška massacre Voćin massacre 1992 Siege of Sarajevo Siege of Bihać Foča massacre Doboj massacre Rape in the Bosnian War Višegrad massacre Miljevci plateau incident Prijedor massacre Zvornik massacre 1993 Kravica attack Duša massacre Operation Maslenica Lašva Valley ethnic cleansing Ahmići massacre Dobrinja mortar attack Mokronoge massacre Operation Neretva '93 Grabovica massacre Stupni Do massacre Operation Medak Pocket 1994 First Markale massacre Banja Luka incident Operation Bøllebank Operation Amanda Operation Tiger 1995 Operation Flash Zagreb rocket attacks Tuzla massacre Mrkonjić Grad incident Srebrenica massacre Operation Miracle Operation Summer '95 Operation Storm Second Markale massacre NATO bombing in Bosnia and Herzegovina Operation Mistral Operation Sana Dayton Agreement Ex-Yugoslav republics : Yugoslavia (SFRY) Croatia Slovenia Bosnia and Herzegovina Republic of Macedonia Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Unrecognized entities : Republic of Serbian Krajina (RSK) SAO Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Syrmia SAO Krajina SAO Kninska Krajina SAO Western Slavonia Republika Srpska (RS) SAO Bosanska Krajina SAO Herzegovina SAO North-Eastern Bosnia SAO Romanija Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia Autonomous Province of Western Bosnia United Nations protectorate : United Nations Transitional Authority for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) Armies : Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) Yugoslav Territorial Defence (TO) Slovenian Territorial Defence (TORS) Yugoslav Army (VJ) Croatian Army (HV) BiH Territorial Defence (TORBIH) Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (ARBiH) Army of Republika Srpska (VRS) Croatian Defence Council (HVO) Military formations and volunteers : Croatian Defence Forces (HOS) Serbian Radical Party Volunteers White Eagles Serb Volunteer Guard Scorpions External factors : NATO UN UNPROFOR Politicians : Ante Marković Borisav Jović Slobodan Milošević Dobrica Ćosić Milan Kučan Janez Janša Igor Bavčar Franjo Tuđman Stjepan Mesić Alija Izetbegović Adil Zulfikarpašić Mate Boban Dario Kordić Fikret Abdić Radovan Karadžić Milan Babić Goran Hadžić Milan Martić Milo Đukanović Vojislav Šešelj Top military commanders : Veljko Kadijević Života Panić Momčilo Perišić Janko Bobetko Martin Špegelj Gojko Šušak Mile Mrkšić Ratko Mladić Rasim Delić Sefer Halilović Atif Dudaković Dragoljub Ojdanić Other notable commanders : Blago Zadro † Ante Gotovina Jovan Divjak Naser Orić Ivica Rajić Blaž Kraljević † Mirko Jović Dragan Vasiljković Željko Ražnatović Nebojša Pavković Key foreign figures : Wesley Clark Bill Clinton Helmut Kohl Boris Yeltsin Tony Blair Warren Zimmermann François Mitterrand Boutros Boutros-Ghali Coordinates : 45°22′27″N 18°57′45″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.37417°N 18.9625°E ﻿ / 45.37417; 18.9625