South American dreadnought race

tagline From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia /tagline subtitle /subtitle jumpto Jump to: navigation , search /jumpto bodycontent The gun trials of the Brazilian dreadnought Minas Geraes ; [ A ] when this photo was taken, all guns capable of training to the port side were fired, forming what was at that time the heaviest broadside ever fired. [ 1 ] A South American dreadnought race between Argentina , Brazil and Chile began in 1907 when the Brazilian government announced its intention to purchase three dreadnoughts —powerful battleships whose capabilities far outstripped older vessels in the world's navies. Previous Argentine–Chilean naval arms races , combined with the overthrow of the Brazilian monarchy and subsequent naval rebellions, had left the Brazilian Navy well behind the Argentine and Chilean navies in quality and total tonnage. Brazilian politicians first moved to address this imbalance in 1904 as part of an overarching goal of becoming an international power. Three small battleships were ordered in late 1905, but after the appearance of the revolutionary British warship HMS Dreadnought in 1906, the Brazilian government canceled all three in favor of the new "dreadnought" type. [ B ] Hulls for two Minas Geraes -class ships were laid down with a third to follow. The Argentine and Chilean governments immediately canceled a pact limiting their navies, and each ordered two dreadnoughts (the Rivadavia and Almirante Latorre classes , respectively). Meanwhile, Brazil's third dreadnought, Rio de Janeiro , was canceled in favor of an even larger ship, which was laid down and ripped up several times after repeated alterations to the design. When the Brazilian government finally settled on a design, they realized it would be outclassed by larger super-dreadnoughts then being built, so they sold the ship to the Ottoman Empire and attempted to acquire a more powerful vessel. The Brazilian government ordered one super-dreadnought from Armstrong, but the beginning of the First World War caused shipbuilders in the United Kingdom to suspend work on foreign warships, effectively canceling the ship. The conflict also caused the United Kingdom to purchase the two Chilean battleships before they were delivered, but Argentina's two dreadnoughts, built in the neutral United States, were handed over in 1915. The First World War marked the end of the dreadnought race, as the South American countries stopped ordering the warships. In the subsequent decades , many naval expansion plans, some involving dreadnought purchases, were proposed. While most never came to fruition, the Chilean government reacquired one of the dreadnoughts in April 1920 that had been taken over by the United Kingdom before the war. No other dreadnoughts were purchased by a South American nation. Contents 1 Background 1.1 Argentine–Chilean boundary dispute 1.2 Brazil's fade and reemergence 2 Catalyst: Brazil's dreadnoughts 3 Response: Argentina and Chile's dreadnought orders 4 Construction and trials of the new warships 5 Third stage: another Brazilian dreadnought 6 Decline and end of the arms race 6.1 Brazilian naval revolt 6.2 Riachuelo 6.3 Attempted sales 7 Post-war expansions 8 Historiography 9 Ships involved 10 Footnotes 11 Endnotes 12 References [ edit ] Background [ edit ] Argentine–Chilean boundary dispute See also: Beagle conflict and Pactos de Mayo Conflicting Argentine and Chilean claims to Patagonia , the southernmost region in South America, had been causing tension between the two countries since the 1840s. This tension was heightened in 1872 and 1878, when Chilean warships seized merchant ships which had been licensed to operate in the disputed area by the Argentine government. An Argentine warship did the same to a Chilean-licensed American ship in 1877. These actions nearly led to war in November 1878, when the Argentines dispatched a squadron of warships to the Santa Cruz River . The Chilean Navy responded in kind, and war was only avoided by a hastily signed treaty. Each government was distracted in the next few years, Argentina's with internal military operations against the indigenous population , and Chile's with the War of the Pacific ( Guerra del Pacífico ) against Bolivia and Peru. Still, a full-fledged naval arms race was underway between Argentina and Chile by 1890. [ 2 ] Almirante Lynch , seen here c. 1891, was laid down in 1890 as part of the developing naval arms race between Argentina and Chile. Both sides began ordering warships from the United Kingdom. In 1887, the Chilean government added £ 3,129,500 to the budget for its fleet, which was centered around two aging central battery ironclads , Almirante Cochrane and Blanco Encalada , and a protected cruiser . They ordered the battleship Capitán Prat , two protected cruisers, and two torpedo boats ; their keels were laid in 1890. The Argentine government quickly responded with an order for two battleships, Independencia and Libertad . The race continued through the 1890s, even after the expensive 1891 Chilean Civil War . The two countries alternated cruiser orders between 1890 and 1895, each ship marking a small increase in capabilities from the previous one. Argentina escalated the race in July 1895 by buying an armored cruiser , Garibaldi , from Italy. Chile responded by ordering its own armored cruiser, O'Higgins , and six torpedo boats; the Argentine government quickly ordered another cruiser from Italy and later bought two more. [ 3 ] The race slowed for a few years after a boundary dispute in the Puna de Atacama region was successfully mediated in 1899 by the American ambassador to Argentina , William Paine Lord , but more ships were ordered by both countries in 1901. The Argentine Navy ordered two Rivadavia -class armored cruisers from Italy, and the Chilean Navy replied with orders for two Constitución -class pre-dreadnought battleships. The Argentines replied by signing letters of intent with the Italian engineering company Ansaldo in May 1901 to buy two larger battleships. The growing dispute disturbed members of the British government, as war looked like a very real possibility, and an armed conflict would disrupt the extensive British commercial interests in the area. [ C ] Through their minister to Chile, they mediated negotiations between the two countries. These were successfully concluded on 28 May 1902 with three pacts. The third limited the naval armaments of both countries; both were barred from acquiring any further warships for five years without giving the other eighteen months' advance notice. The United Kingdom's Royal Navy purchased the two Chilean battleships, while the Imperial Japanese Navy took over the order for the two Argentine armored cruisers; the two Argentine battleships were never ordered. Two Argentine cruisers and Chile's Capitán Prat were demilitarized . [ 5 ] [ edit ] Brazil's fade and reemergence Brazil's navy fell into disrepair and obsolescence after an 1889 revolution , which deposed Emperor Dom Pedro II , and an 1893–94 navy revolt . [ 6 ] Meanwhile, although the Argentine–Chilean agreement had limited their naval expansion, they still retained the numerous vessels built in the interim, [ 7 ] so by the turn of the 20th century the Brazilian Navy lagged far behind its Argentine and Chilean counterparts in quality and total tonnage, [ 8 ] [ D ] despite Brazil having nearly three times the population of Argentina and almost five times that of Chile. [ 10 ] Rising demand for coffee and rubber brought Brazil an influx of revenue in the early 1900s. [ 11 ] Simultaneously, there was a drive on the part of prominent Brazilians, most notably the Baron of Rio Branco , [ E ] to have the country recognized as an international power. [ 13 ] The National Congress of Brazil drew up and passed a large naval acquisition program in late 1904, but it was two years before any ships were ordered. [ 14 ] Two factions argued over the types of ships to be ordered. [ 13 ] One, supported by the British armament company Armstrong Whitworth , which eventually received the order, [ 15 ] favored a navy centered around a small number of large warships, while the other preferred a larger navy of smaller warships. [ 13 ] The latter faction originally prevailed. When Law no. 1452 was passed on 30 December 1905, which authorized £4,214,550 for new warship construction—of which £1,685,820 would be spent in 1906—three small battleships, three armored cruisers , six destroyers , twelve torpedo boats , three submarines , and two river monitors were ordered. [ 16 ] Though the Brazilian government later eliminated the armored cruisers for reasons of cost, the Minister of the Navy, Admiral Júlio César de Noronha , signed a contract with Armstrong Whitworth for three small battleships on 23 July 1906. [ 17 ] The British ambassador to Brazil was opposed to the planned naval expansion, even though the orders went to a British company, for its large cost and its negative effects on relations between Brazil and Argentina. He saw it as "an embodiment of national vanity, combined with personal motives of a pecuniary character." [ 18 ] The American ambassador to Brazil was alarmed, and sent a cablegram to his Department of State in September 1906, warning them of the destabilization that would occur if the situation devolved into a full naval arms race. At the same time, the American government under Theodore Roosevelt tried using diplomatic means to coerce the Brazilians into canceling their ships, but the attempts were dismissed, with the Baron of Rio Branco remarking that caving to the American demands would render Brazil as powerless as Cuba, whose new constitution allowed the American government to intervene in Cuban affairs. [ 19 ] The new President of Brazil , Afonso Pena , supported the naval acquisitions in an address to the National Congress of Brazil in November 1906, as in his opinion the ships were necessary to replace the losses recently suffered by the navy, most notably the old Aquidabã , and the antiquated vessels of the current navy. [ 20 ] [ edit ] Catalyst: Brazil's dreadnoughts Main article: Minas Geraes -class battleship Brazil laid the keels of three battleships, but Britain's new dreadnought concept, represented by the commissioning of the ship of the same name in December 1906, rendered the Brazilian ships obsolete before they were completed. [ 21 ] Naval historian Robert Schenia claims that a transition to a few large warships was helped when Aquidabã exploded in January 1906, as it killed many of the small-ship supporters, but the final blow was the selection of a large-ship advocate, Rear Admiral Alexandrino Fario de Alencar , for the powerful post of minister of the navy in November. [ 22 ] The money authorized for naval expansion in 1905 was redirected by de Alencar to building three dreadnoughts (with the third to be laid down after the first was launched), three scout cruisers (later reduced to two, which became the Bahia class ), fifteen destroyers (later reduced to ten, the Pará class ), three submarines (the F 1 class ), and two submarine tenders (later reduced to one, Ceara ). [ 23 ] The Brazilian Congress approved these changes with the stipulation that the total price of the naval program did not exceed the original limit, so the increase in battleship tonnage (originally planned to go from 13,000 long tons (13,000 t) to 18,000 long tons (18,000 t)) was bought with decreasing the number of destroyers. [ 24 ] The three battleships on which construction had begun were scrapped beginning on 7 January 1907, and the design for the new dreadnoughts was approved on 20 February. [ 21 ] Newspapers began reporting a Brazilian order for dreadnoughts in March, [ 25 ] while the full order, including all three dreadnoughts and the two cruisers, was revealed in August. [ 26 ] Minas Geraes ' just after being launched . She weighed only around 9,000 long tons (9,100 metric tons ) at this time. [ 27 ] The Brazilian order for what contemporary commentators called "the most powerful battleship[s] in the world" came at a time when few countries in the world had contracted for such armament. [ 28 ] Brazil was the third country to have a dreadnought under construction, behind the United Kingdom, with Dreadnought and the Bellerophon class , and the United States, with the South Carolina class . This meant that Brazil was in line to have a dreadnought before many of the world's perceived powers, like France , the German Empire , the Russian Empire , and the Empire of Japan , and consequently the order caused a major stir. [ 29 ] [ F ] Newspapers and journals around the world speculated that Brazil was acting as a proxy for a naval power which would take possession of the two dreadnoughts soon after completion, as they did not believe that a previously insignificant geopolitical power would contract for such powerful armament. [ 31 ] Many American, British, and German sources variously accused the Americans, British, German, or Japanese governments of secretly plotting to purchase the vessels. [ 32 ] [ G ] The World's Work remarked: The question that is puzzling diplomats the world over is why Brazil should want ferocious leviathans of such size and armament and speed as to place them ten to fifteen years in advance of any other nation besides Great Britain. ... Although Brazil has denied that these are meant for England or Japan, naval men of all nations suspect that they are meant for some government other than Brazil's. [ H ] In the event of war, the government which would first be able to secure these vessels ... would immediately place the odds of naval supremacy in its favor. England, no matter how many Dreadnoughts she has, would be compelled to buy them to keep them from some lesser power. They bring a new question into international politics. They may be leaders of a great fleet which minor government are said to be preparing to build; or, to put it more accurately, to stand sponsors for. Some Machiavellian hand may be at work in this new game of international politics and the British Admiralty is suspected. But every statesmen and naval student may make his own guess. (" The Mystery of the Great Brazilian Battleships ," World's Work 17, no. 1 (1909): 10867–68) On the other side of the Atlantic, in the midst of the early 20th century naval arms race between the United Kingdom and Germany, members of the British House of Commons fretted over the battleships' possible destinations, though the Admiralty consistently stated that they did not believe any sale would occur. In mid-July and September 1908, the Commons discussed purchasing the ships to bolster the Royal Navy and ensure they would not be sold to a foreign rival, which would disrupt the British naval plan set in place by the " Two-power Standard ", though in March and late July 1908, the Brazilian government officially denied any sale was planned. [ 34 ] In March 1909, the British press and House of Commons began pushing for more dreadnoughts after the First Lord of the Admiralty , Reginald McKenna , asserted that Germany had stepped up its building schedule and would complete thirteen dreadnoughts in 1911—four more than previously estimated. Naturally, the subject of purchasing the Brazilian dreadnoughts already being built was brought up, and McKenna had to officially deny that the government was planning to tender an offer for the warships. [ 35 ] He also stated that a sale to a foreign power would be inconsequential, as "our present superiority in strength in 1909–10 is so great that no alarm would be created in the mind of the Board of Admiralty." [ 36 ] [ edit ] Response: Argentina and Chile's dreadnought orders Main articles: Rivadavia -class battleship and Almirante Latorre -class battleship Argentina's Rivadavia under construction in the United States in 1912 Argentina and Chile were alarmed by the Brazilian move, and they quickly moved to nullify the 1902 agreement which restricted their navies. [ 37 ] [ I ] In November 1906—before the Brazilian battleships were canceled in favor of dreadnoughts—Argentina's Minister of Foreign Affairs , Manuel Augusto Montes de Oca , remarked that any one of the new Brazilian vessels could destroy the entire Argentine and Chilean fleets. [ 39 ] While this may have been hyperbole, either Brazilian dreadnought was much more powerful than any single vessel in the Argentine or Chilean fleets in 1910. [ 40 ] Fearing a Brazilian–Chilean alliance, the Argentine government paid particular attention to the two countries' communications. de Oca's successor, Estanisláo Zeballos , was a major factor in this. In June 1908, he presented a plan to the Congress where the Argentines would offer the Brazilian government a chance to give one of their two dreadnoughts then building to Argentina to maintain naval parity between the two countries. Should they have refused, the Argentine government would have given their Brazilian counterparts an ultimatum: if in eight days they did not comply, the mobilized Argentine Army would invade what Zeballos claimed was an defenseless Rio de Janeiro. Unfortunately for Zeballos, the plans were leaked to the media; the public outcry from details first published in the newspaper La Nación were enough to halt the plan and ensure Zeballos' resignation. [ 41 ] [ J ] The Argentine government was also deeply concerned with the possible effect on the country's large export trade, as a Brazilian blockade of the entrance to the Río de la Plata would cripple the Argentine economy. The acquisition of dreadnoughts to maintain an equal footing with Brazil would, in the words of the Argentine admiral overseeing his countries' dreadnoughts while they were being constructed, avoid a "preponderance of power on the other side, where a sudden gust of popular feeling or injured pride might make [a blockade] a dangerous weapon against us." [ 43 ] Both countries faced difficulty in financing their own dreadnoughts. Although in Argentina the ruling National Autonomist Party supported the purchases, they initially faced public resistance for such expensive acquisitions. [ 19 ] An influx of inflammatory newspaper editorials supporting new dreadnoughts, especially from La Prensa , and renewed border disputes, particularly Brazilian assertions that the Argentines were attempting to restore the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata , swayed the public to support the purchases. [ 44 ] The Argentine President, José Figueroa Alcorta , attempted to ease the tensions with a message warning the Brazilians of a naval arms race should they continue on their present course. The Brazilian government replied with reasoning similar to Pena's speech in 1906, in that they believed the ships were necessary to replace the antiquated equipment left by the long-term neglect of the Brazilian Navy, and they repeatedly insisted that the ships were not meant for use against Argentina. [ 45 ] A bill authorizing the Argentine Navy to acquire three dreadnoughts was passed by the Chamber of Deputies seventy-two to thirteen in August, [ 46 ] but it was defeated in the Senate in November after the Congress passed an arbitration treaty and made a last-ditch offer to purchase one of the two Brazilian dreadnoughts currently being constructed. [ 47 ] The Brazilian government declined, so the bill was reintroduced and passed by the Senate on 17 December 1908 with forty-nine in support to thirteen opposed, over socialist objections that the country needed to be populated and the large sum of money could be better spent in other areas of the government. [ 48 ] After the Argentine government sent a naval delegation to Europe to solicit and evaluate armament companies' offers, [ 19 ] they received tenders from fifteen shipyards in five countries (the United States, Great Britain, Germany, France, and Italy), and conducted a drawn-out bidding process . The Argentine delegation rejected all of the bids twice, each time recycling the best technical aspects of the tendered designs when crafting new bidding requirements. [ 49 ] The reason given for the first rejection was the appearance of the first super-dreadnought , HMS Orion . [ 50 ] Still, the shipbuilders were furious, as the process of designing a major warship took large amounts of time and money, [ 51 ] and they believed the Argentine tactic revealed their individual trade secrets . [ 49 ] A British naval architect published a scathing condemnation of the Argentine tactics, albeit only after the contracts were not awarded to a British company: We may assume that the British battleships embody good ideas and good practice—in all probability the very best. These cannot fail, in a greater or less degree, to become part of the design which the British shipbuilder first submits to the Argentine Government. In the second inquiry it may be presumed that everything that was good in the first proposals had been seized upon by the Argentine authorities and asked for in the new design. This second request went not only to British builders but to all the builders of the world, and in this way it is exceedingly probable that a serious leakage of ideas and practice of our ships was disseminated through the world by the Argentine government. ... The third inquiry that was issued showed to all the builders of the world what has been eliminated or modified in the second inquiry; and so the process of leakage went merrily on, and with it that of the education of foreign builders and the Argentine government. (John H. Biles, "Argentina," Navy [Washington] 4, no. 7 [1910]: 30, in Robert Scheina, Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987 [Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1987], 84) The United States' Fore River Shipbuilding Company tendered the lowest bid—in part owing to the availability of cheap steel, though they were accused of quoting an unprofitable price so the ships could act as loss leaders —and was awarded the contract. [ 52 ] This aroused further suspicion in the European bidders, who had believed that the United States was not a real contender, although Argentina did order twelve destroyers from British, French, and German shipyards. The Times (London) editorialized that the American government had heavily misused their diplomatic influence in directing the contracts to Fore River, and accused the company of obscenely lowering their price. [ 53 ] The United States' Delaware , seen here in 1920, was sent on a ten-week South American voyage in 1911 with the goal of obtaining armament contracts for American companies. [ 54 ] The Argentine contract included an option for a third dreadnought in case the Brazilian government adhered to its contractual obligations to order a third dreadnought. Two newspapers, La Prensa and La Argentina , heavily advocated for a third ship; the latter even started a petition to raise money for a new battleship. [ 55 ] The American minister to Argentina, Charles H. Sherrill , cabled back to the United States that "this newspaper rivalry promises the early conclusion of a movement which means a third battleship whether by public subscription or by Government funds." [ 56 ] On 31 December 1910, the Argentine government decided against constructing the ship, [ 57 ] after Roque Sáenz Peña , who had been making entreaties to Brazil to end the expensive naval race, was elected to the Presidency. [ 58 ] In addition, the intended target of the third Argentine dreadnought, the third Brazilian dreadnought, had already been canceled multiple times. [ 59 ] [ K ] The Chilean government delayed their naval plans after a financial depression brought on by the 1906 Valparaíso earthquake and a drastic fall in the nitrate market in 1907. [ 61 ] [ L ] Money for a naval building program was only allocated in 1910. [ 63 ] Although the Chilean government solicited bids from several armament companies, nearly all believed that a British company would win the contract; the American naval attaché opined that without anything short of a revolution the contracts were destined for the United Kingdom. The Chilean Navy had cultivated extensive ties with the United Kingdom's Royal Navy since the 1830s, when Chilean naval officers were given places on British ships to receive training and experience they could bring back to their country. This relationship had recently been cemented when a British naval mission was requested by Chile and sent in 1911. [ 64 ] Still, the American and German governments attempted to swing sentiment to their side, and dispatched naval vessels to Chilean ports. Their efforts were futile, and the design tendered by Armstrong Whitworth was chosen and awarded on 25 July 1911. [ 65 ] Other South American navies were in no state to respond. The Peruvian Navy , fourth-largest on the continent, had been decimated during the naval campaign of the War of the Pacific (1879–83). The problem was compounded by not purchasing ships after the war, so that a pair of scout cruisers delivered in 1906 and 1907, Almirante Grau and Coronel Bolognesi , were the first new warships acquired since the conflict. They were augmented by two submarines and a destroyer ordered from France. With little expertise in operating any kind of modern warship, let alone a dreadnought, Peru was far from joining the naval race. Their highest aspirations resulted in the near-acquisition of the obsolete French armored cruiser Dupuy de Lôme , which they began payments on but stopped before finishing. The rest of the South American navies had no experience in operating large modern warships, though many added smaller vessels to their naval forces in the same time period. The Uruguayan Navy bought a 1,400-long-ton (1,400 t) gunboat in 1910, and the Venezuelan Navy bought one ex-Spanish 1,125-long-ton (1,143 t) protected cruiser , Mariscal Sucre , from the United States in 1912. The Ecuadorian Navy added a Chilean torpedo boat to its fleet in 1907, complementing its fleet of two avisos , both around 800 long tons (810 t), two small steamers, and one minor coast guard ship. [ 66 ] [ edit ] Construction and trials of the new warships Rivadavia , c. 1914–15, probably on one of her sea trials Brazil's Minas Geraes , the lead ship , was laid down by Armstrong on 17 April 1907, while her sister ship São Paulo followed thirteen days later at Vickers. Construction of the partial hull needed to launch Minas Geraes was delayed by a four-month strike to 10 September 1908, and São Paulo followed on 19 April 1909. [ 67 ] Both were christened in front of large crowds by the wife of Francisco Régis de Oliveira , the Brazilian ambassador to the United Kingdom . [ 68 ] After multiple trials of the speed, endurance, efficiency, and weaponry of the ship, [ 69 ] Minas Geraes was completed and handed over to Brazil on 5 January 1910. [ 70 ] São Paulo followed in July, after her own trials. [ 71 ] Argentina's Rivadavia was built by Fore River at its shipyard in Massachusetts, and as called for in the final contract, Moreno was subcontracted out to the New York Shipbuilding Corporation of New Jersey. [ 49 ] The steel for the ships was largely supplied by the Bethlehem Steel Company of Pennsylvania. [ 72 ] Rivadavia was laid down on 25 May 1910—one hundred years after the establishment of the first independent Argentine government, the Primera Junta —and launched on 26 August 1911. [ 73 ] Moreno was laid down on 10 July 1910 and launched on 23 September 1911. [ 74 ] Construction on both ships took longer than usual, and there were further delays during their sea trials when one of Rivadavia ' s turbines was damaged and one of Moreno ' s turbines failed. [ 75 ] The two were only officially completed in December 1914 and February 1915. [ 76 ] Even the departure of Moreno was marked by mishaps, as the ship sank a barge and ran aground twice. [ 77 ] Chile's Almirante Latorre was launched on 27 November 1913. [ 78 ] [ M ] After the First World War broke out in Europe, work on Almirante Latorre was halted in August 1914, [ 80 ] and she was formally purchased on 9 September after the British Cabinet recommended it four days earlier. [ 81 ] Almirante Latorre was not forcibly seized like the Ottoman Reshadieh and Sultan Osman I (ex- Rio de Janeiro ), two other ships being built for a foreign navy, as a result of Chile's "friendly neutral" status with the United Kingdom which the British needed to maintain owing to their dependence on Chilean nitrate imports, which were vital to the British armament industry. [ 82 ] The former Chilean ship was completed on 30 September 1915, [ 83 ] commissioned into the Royal Navy on 15 October, and served in that navy in the First World War. [ 84 ] Work on the other battleship, Almirante Cochrane , was halted after the outbreak of war. The British purchased her on 28 February 1918 to be converted to an aircraft carrier , as the partially completed ship was the only available large and fast hull capable of being modified into a carrier without major reconstruction. Low priority and quarrels with shipyard workers slowed completion of the ship; she was commissioned into the Royal Navy as HMS Eagle in 1924. [ 85 ] [ edit ] Third stage: another Brazilian dreadnought Main article: HMS Agincourt (1913) After the first Brazilian dreadnought, Minas Geraes , was launched, the Brazilian government began an extended campaign to remove the third dreadnought from the contract because of political—relations with Argentina were warming—and economic reasons. After much negotiating and attempts from Armstrong to hold the Brazilian government to the contract, the Brazilians relented, due in part to lower bond rates that made it possible for the government to borrow the necessary money. Rio de Janeiro was laid for the first time in March 1910. [ 86 ] By May, the Brazilian government asked Armstrong to stop work on the new warship and to submit new designs which took in the most recent advance in naval technology, super-dreadnoughts . Eustace Tennyson-d'Eyncourt served as Armstrong's liaison to Brazil. Originally, the dreadnought was going to mount twelve 14-inch guns, but the many requests made by the Brazilian Navy for minor changes delayed the contract signing until 10 October 1910. The battleship's keel laying was delayed further by a labor dispute with the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights , which led to a lockout . During these delays, a new Minister of the Navy, Admiral Marques Leão , was appointed to replace de Alencar—an important development, as the contract stipulated that the design could only proceed with the approval of the new Minister. Again, however, the Brazilian Navy found itself torn between two schools of thought: Leão and others in the navy favored a reversion to the 12-inch gun, but others, led by the outgoing Minister of the Navy (de Alencar) and the head of the Brazilian naval commission in the United Kingdom (Rear Admiral Duarte Huet de Bacellar Pinto Guedes ), were strongly in favor of obtaining the ship with the largest armament—in this case, a design drawn up by Bacellar, carrying eight 16-inch guns, six 9.4-inch guns, and fourteen 6-inch guns. [ 87 ] Sailors onboard Minas Geraes , probably during the ship's visit to the United States in early 1910 D'Eyncourt, who had departed Brazil in October immediately after the contract was signed, returned in March 1911 to display the various design options available to the Brazilian Navy. Armstrong evidently thought the second faction would prevail, so he also took with him everything needed to close a deal on Bacellar's design. By mid-March, Armstrong's contacts in Brazil reported that Leão had convinced the President to cancel the design with twelve 14-inch guns in favor of a smaller ship. [ 88 ] The credit may not have laid with Leão alone, though. By March 1911, the Brazilian President Hermes Rodrigues da Fonseca was dealing with multiple issues. Most importantly, he had to deal with the fallout from a large naval revolt in November 1910 (the Revolt of the Lash ), which had seen three of the new vessels just purchased by the navy, along with one older coast-defense ship, mutiny against the use of corporal punishment in the navy. To make matters worse, the dreadnoughts' expense combined with loan payments and a worsening economy had led to worsening government debt compounded by budget deficits . Brazil's external and internal debt would reach $500 and $335 million (respectively) by 1913, partly through rising deficits, which were $22 million in 1908 and $47 million by 1912. [ 89 ] In May, the president commented negatively on the new ship: When I assumed office, I found that my predecessor had signed a contract for the building of the battleship Rio de Janeiro , a vessel of 32,000 tons, with an armament of 14 in. guns. Considerations of every kind pointed to the inconvenience of acquiring such a vessel and to the revision of the contract in the sense of reducing the tonnage. This was done, and we shall possess a powerful unit which will not be built on exaggerated lines such as have not as yet stood the time of experience. (Hermes Rodrigues da Fonseca, 3 May 1911, in Robert Scheina, Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987 [Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1987], 354) D'Eyncourt probably avoided proposing any design with 16-inch guns when he saw the political situation. In meetings with Leão, designs of only ten 12-inch guns mounted on the centerline were quickly rejected, even though their broadside was as strong as that of the Minas Geraes class, but a design with no less than fourteen 12-inch guns emerged as the frontrunner. Author David Topliss attributes this to political necessity, as he believed the Minister of the Navy could not validate purchasing a seemingly less-powerful dreadnought than the Minas Geraes class: with larger guns ruled out, the only remaining choice was a larger number of guns. [ 90 ] After numerous requests for design alterations from the Brazilian Navy were accommodated or rejected, a contract was signed for a ship with fourteen 12-inch guns on 3 June 1911 for £2,675,000, and Rio de Janeiro ' s keel was laid for the fourth time on 14 September. It did not take long for the Brazilian government to reconsider their decision again; [ 91 ] by mid-1912, battleships with 14-inch guns were under construction, and suddenly it seemed that Rio de Janeiro would be outclassed upon completion. [ 92 ] Making matters worse, a European depression after the end of the Second Balkan War in August 1913 reduced Brazil's ability to obtain foreign loans. This coincided with a collapse in Brazil's coffee and rubber exports, the latter due to the loss of the Brazilian rubber monopoly to British plantations in the Far East. The price of coffee declined by 20% and Brazilian exports of it dropped 12.5% between 1912 and 1913; rubber saw a similar decline of 25 and 36.6%, respectively. [ 93 ] Armstrong studied whether replacing the 12-inch guns with seven 15-inch guns would be feasible, but Brazil was probably already attempting to sell the ship. In the tension building up to the First World War, many countries, including Russia, Italy, Greece, and the Ottoman Empire, were interested in purchasing the ship. Russia quickly dropped out, leaving Italy and the rival Greeks and Ottomans. The Italians seemed close to purchasing the ship until the French government decided to back the Greeks—rather than allow the Italians, who were the principal naval rivals of the French, to obtain the ship. The Grecian government made an offer for the original purchase price plus an additional £50,000, but as the Greeks worked to obtain an initial installment, the Ottomans were able to obtain a loan from a French banker acting independent of his government. With Brazilian acceptance of this offer, the Ottoman Navy secured the ship on 29 December 1913 for £1,200,000 as-is. [ 94 ] As part of the purchase contract, the remainder of the ship was constructed with £2,340,000 in Ottoman money. [ 95 ] Renamed Sultan Osman I , she was eventually taken over by the British shortly after the beginning of the First World War, serving with the Royal Navy as HMS Agincourt . [ 96 ] [ N ] The Argentine government authorized a third dreadnought in October 1912 in case Rio de Janeiro was completed and delivered, but the ship was never named or built. [ 98 ] [ edit ] Decline and end of the arms race [ edit ] Brazilian naval revolt Main article: Revolt of the Lash The leader of the Revolt of the Lash, João Cândido Felisberto (front row, directly to the left of the man in the dark suit), with reporters, officers and sailors on board Minas Geraes on 26 November 1910 In late November 1910, a large naval revolt, later named the Revolt of the Lash, or Revolta da Chibata , broke out in Rio de Janeiro. [ O ] The issue began in the racial makeup of the navy's crews, which were heavily black or mulatto , as opposed to the mostly white officers. [ 99 ] The Baron of Rio Branco commented "For the recruitment of marines and enlisted men, we bring aboard the dregs of our urban centers, the most worthless lumpen, without preparation of any sort. Ex-slaves and the sons of slaves make up our ships' crews, most of the dark-skinned or dark-skinned mulattos." [ 100 ] This kind of impressment , combined with the heavy use of corporal punishment for even minor offenses, meant that relations between the black crews and white officers was tepid at best. Crewmen aboard Minas Geraes began planning for a revolt in 1910. They chose João Cândido Felisberto , an experienced sailor, as their leader, and waited for the captain to order another whipping so the mutineers could clearly tie the revolt to it. As such, the immediate catalyst came on 16 November 1910 when an Afro-Brazilian sailor, Marcelino Rodrigues Menezes , was brutally flogged 250 times for insubordination. [ 101 ] A Brazilian government observer, former navy captain José Carlos de Carvalho , stated that the sailor's back looked like "a mullet sliced open for salting." [ 102 ] The revolt began aboard Minas Geraes on 22 November, after the mutineers had ensured they were properly organized and prepared. At nearly the same time, São Paulo , the new cruiser Bahia , and the twelve-year-old coast-defense ship Deodoro also revolted, all with relatively little violence. These represented the newest and most powerful ships in the navy; three of the four ships had been completed and commissioned only months before. Felisberto and his fellow sailors demanded an end to the 'slavery' being practiced by the navy. Though navy officers and the president were staunchly opposed to any sort of amnesty, many legislators did. Over the next three days, both houses of the Brazilian National Congress, led by the influential senator Ruy Barbosa , passed a general bill granting amnesty to all involved and ending the use of corporal punishment. [ 103 ] In the aftermath of the revolt, the two Brazilian dreadnoughts were disarmed by the removal of their guns' breechblocks . The revolt and consequent state of the navy, which was essentially unable to operate for fear of another rebellion, caused many leading Brazilians, including the president, top politicians including the Baron of Rio Branco, and the editor of a top newspaper, Jornal do Commercio , to question the use of the new ships and support their sale to a foreign country. In their place, Fonseca believed smaller warships capable of traversing Brazil's many rivers would be more useful. [ 104 ] The British ambassador to Brazil, W.H.D. Haggard, was ecstatic at the Baron's about-face, saying "This is indeed a wonderful surrender on the part of the man who was answerable for the purchase and who looked upon them as the most cherished offspring of his policy." [ 105 ] However, the president and cabinet, despite still believing that the ships should be sold, decided against doing so in fear of the effect on domestic politics. Still, the revolt had a clear effect on the navy's readiness: by 1912, an Armstrong agent stated that the ships were in terrible condition, with rust already forming on turrets and boilers. The agent believed it would cost the Brazilian Navy around £700,000 to address these issues. [ 106 ] Haggard commented "These ships are absolutely useless to Brazil." [ 107 ] Despite the government's refusal to sell the two Minas Geraes -class ships, this sequence of events, when combined with the Baron of Rio Branco's death in 1912, were major factors in the Brazilian government's decision to sell Rio de Janiero probably by January 1913 and certainly by September of that year. [ 108 ] [ edit ] Riachuelo After selling Rio de Janeiro , the Brazilian government asked Armstrong and Vickers to prepare more designs for a new battleship. They replied with at least fourteen designs, six from Vickers (December 1913 through March 1914) and eight from Armstrong (February 1914). Vickers' designs varied between eight and ten 15-inch and eight 16-inch guns, with speeds between 22 and 25 knots (the lower-end ships having mixed firing, the higher using oil), and displacements between 26,000 tonnes (26,000 long tons) and 30,500 tonnes (30,000 long tons). Armstrong took two basic designs, one with eight and the other with ten 15-inch guns, and varied their speed and firing. [ 109 ] [ P ] The Brazilian government chose what was labeled as Design 781, the first of the eight 15-inch designs tendered by Armstrong, which also shared characteristics with the Queen Elizabeth and Revenge classes then being built for the United Kingdom. [ 110 ] The Brazilian government placed an order for one ship of this design, to be named Riachuelo , at the Armstrong Whitworth shipyard in Elswick on 12 May 1914. [ 111 ] [ Q ] Some preliminary work was completed for Riachuelo , but the ship's keel had not been laid by the time the United Kingdom declared war on the Central Powers in August 1914, and Riachuelo was never constructed. [ 109 ] [ edit ] Attempted sales After Rio de Janeiro was sold to the Ottoman Empire, the Argentine government bowed to popular demand and began to seek a buyer for their two dreadnoughts. The money received in return would be devoted to internal improvements. Three bills directing that the battleships be sold were introduced into the Argentine National Congress in mid-1914, but all were defeated. Still, the British and Germans expressed worries that the ships could be sold to a belligerent nation, while the Russian, Ottoman, Italian, and Grecian governments were all reportedly interested in buying both ships, the latter as a counter to the Ottoman purchase of Rio de Janeiro . [ 114 ] The New-York Tribune reported in late April that the Argentine government rejected a $17.5 million offer for Moreno alone, which would have netted them a large profit over the original construction cost of the ships ($12 million). [ 115 ] The United States, worried that its neutrality would not be respected and its technology would be released for study to a foreign country, put diplomatic pressure on the Argentine government to keep the ships, which it eventually did. [ 116 ] Similarly, the New-York Tribune , in early November 1913, and Proceedings , in May and June 1914, reported that Greece had reached an accord to purchase Chile's first battleship as a counterbalance to the Ottoman acquisition of Rio de Janeiro , [ 117 ] but despite a developing sentiment within Chile to sell one or both of the dreadnoughts, no deal was made. [ 118 ] In each of the countries involved in the South American dreadnought arms race, movements arose that advocated the sale of the dreadnoughts to devote the money toward more worthy pursuits. [ 119 ] The costs for the ships were rightfully viewed as enormous. After the Minas Geraes class was ordered, a Brazilian newspaper equated the initial purchase cost for the three ships as equaling 3,125 miles of railroad tracks or 30,300 homesteads . Naval historian Robert Scheina put the price at £ 6,110,100 without accounting for ammunition, which was £605,520, or necessary upgrades to docks, which was £832,000. Costs for maintenance and related issues, which in the first five years of Minas Geraes ' s and São Paulo ' s commissioned lives was about 60 percent of the initial cost, only added to the already staggering sum of money. [ 120 ] The two Rivadavia s were purchased for about a fifth of the Argentine government's yearly income, a figure which did not include the later in-service costs. [ 121 ] Historian Robert K. Massie rounded the figure to a quarter of each government's annual income. [ 122 ] In addition, the nationalistic sentiments that exacerbated the naval arms race had given way to slowing economies and growing public opinion that supported investing inside the country. [ 119 ] Commenting on this, the United States' Minister to Chile , Henry Prather Fletcher , wrote to Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan : "Since the naval rivalry began in 1910, financial conditions, which were none too good then, have grown worse; and as time approaches for the final payment, feeling has been growing in these countries that perhaps they are much more in need of money than of battleships." [ 123 ] [ edit ] Post-war expansions After the First World War, the dreadnought race never resumed, but many plans for post-war naval expansions and improvements were attempted by the Argentine, Brazilian, and Chilean governments. The Brazilians modernized Minas Geraes , São Paulo , and the two cruisers acquired under the 1904 plan, Bahia and Rio Grande do Sul , between 1918 and 1925. [ 124 ] They also made plans to acquire additional ships in the 1920s and '30s, but both were sharply reduced from the original proposals. In 1924, a proposal for the construction of a relatively modest number of warships (a heavy cruiser, and five destroyers) and five submarines was floated. In the same year, the newly arrived American naval mission, led by Rear Admiral Carl Theodore Vogelgesang , tendered a naval expansion plan of 151,000 tons, divided between battleships (70,000), cruisers (60,000), destroyers (15,000), and submarines (6,000). The United States' State Department, led by Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes , was fresh from negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty and not keen on seeing another dreadnought race, so Hughes quickly moved to thwart the efforts of the mission. Only one Italian-built submarine, Humaytá , was acquired under this plan. [ 125 ] Minas Geraes was modernized at the Rio de Janeiro Naval Yard from June 1931 to 1938, [ 126 ] [ R ] but São Paulo ' s poor material condition made any similar action uneconomical. [ 129 ] During the same period, the Brazilian government looked into purchasing cruisers from the United States Navy but ran into the restrictions of the Washington and London Naval Treaties , which prevented the sale of used warships to foreign countries. They also tried to purchase destroyers from the United States, but eventually contracted for six destroyers from the United Kingdom. [ S ] In the interim, a plan to lease six destroyers from the United States Navy was abandoned after it was met with strong opposition from both international and American institutions. [ 130 ] Three Marcilio Dias -class destroyers , based on the American Mahan class , were laid down in Brazil with six minelayers, all of which were launched between 1939 and 1941. Though both programs required foreign assistance to complete and were consequently delayed by the war, all nine ships were completed by 1944. [ 131 ] Brazilian modernizations Bahia prior to being modernized between 1925 and 26, with a low bridge and two funnels. Bahia post-modernization. The most striking visual changes were adding height to and adding a third funnel. Even though oil has a greater thermal efficiency , an extra funnel was necessitated by the arrangement of new oil-firing boilers, where two each were placed in three independent compartments. [ 132 ] Minas Geraes before she was modernized in New York in 1920–21 and in Brazil in 1931–38. The ship was built with two funnels to release the exhaust from the dual-burning (both coal and oil) boilers into the air but away from the ship. Minas Geraes in 1942, post-modernization. The ship was converted to full oil firing during the 1930s, and the consequent loss in boilers, from eighteen to six, allowed the exhaust to be trunked into a single funnel. Other modifications made during this period were less visually evident. [ 133 ] As part of an overall scheme to regain naval superiority in the region, the Argentines sent Rivadavia and Moreno to the United States in 1924 and 1926 to be modernized. Also, a large naval building program in support of this goal was launched in 1926, three cruisers (the Italian-built Veinticinco de Mayo class and the British-built La Argentina ), twelve destroyers (the Spanish-built Churruca class and the British-built Mendoza / Buenos Aires classes), and three submarines (the Italian-built Santa Fe class ) were acquired. [ 134 ] Chile began to seek additional ships to bolster its fleet in 1919, and the United Kingdom eagerly offered many of its surplus warships. This action worried nearby nations, who feared that a Chilean attempt to become the region's most powerful navy would destabilize the area and start another naval arms race. [ 135 ] Chile asked for Canada and Eagle , the two battleships they ordered before the war, but the cost of converting the latter back to a battleship was too high. [ 136 ] Planned replacements included the two remaining Invincible -class battlecruisers , but a leak to the press of the secret negotiations to acquire them caused an uproar within Chile itself over the value of such ships. [ 137 ] In the end, Chile only bought Canada and four destroyers in April 1920. All five had been ordered from British yards by the Chilean government before 1914, but were purchased by the Royal Navy after the British entered the First World War. [ 138 ] All were obtained for comparatively low prices; Canada was sold for just £1,000,000, less than half of what had been required to construct the ship. [ 139 ] The Chileans continued to acquire more ships from the British in the 1920s, adding six destroyers (the Serrano class ), three submarines (the Capitan O'Brien class ), and smaller ships in the late 1920s. [ 140 ] Almirante Latorre was sailed to the United Kingdom in 1929 to be modernized at Devonport Dockyard , which was completed in 1931. [ 141 ] Little progress was made during a recession in the early 1930s and a major naval revolt in 1931. [ 142 ] In the late 1930s, the Chilean government inquired into the possibility of constructing an 8,600-long-ton (8,700 t) cruiser in the United Kingdom, Italy, Germany, or Sweden, but this did not lead to an order. A second plan to acquire two small cruisers was dropped with the beginning of the Second World War. [ 143 ] Soon after the attack on Pearl Harbor , the United States attempted to purchase Almirante Latorre , two destroyers, and a submarine tender , but the offer was rejected. [ 144 ] At the beginning of the Second World War, the three major South American navies found themselves unable to acquire major warships. With the end, the United States and United Kingdom had many ships that were unnecessary or surplus to the requirements of their post-war navies. Still, the South American countries ran into political difficulties in acquiring anything larger than Flower -class corvettes and River -class frigates . The war had proved the obsolete status of battleships, so the navies were seeking cruisers, destroyers, and submarines, which they were finally able to acquire when the Red Scare began to strongly affect American and international politics. One of the deals reached under the Mutual Defense Assistance Act (1949) sold six American light cruisers to Argentina, Brazil, and Chile in January 1951. [ T ] While this bolstered the navies of important South American allies of the United States, which would be treaty-bound to assist the United States in any war, naval historian Robert Scheina argues that the American government also used the opportunity to significantly affect the traditional naval rivalry among the three countries: While more than ninety percent of the aid provided under [the Mutual Defense Assistance Act] went to European and Asian countries, the United States, now the dominant foreign power in Latin America, used surplus ships as a tool to further mutual interests ... and reshape the Latin American naval panorama. Thus Argentina's pre-World War II formula that she had to possess a fleet equal in strength to the combined fleets of Brazil and Chile changed in one stroke to 1A = 1B = 1C. (Robert Scheina, Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987 [Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1987], 173) With the influx of relatively modern warships, the battleships of the three countries were sold for scrap in the 1950s. The Brazilian ships were disposed of first; São Paulo was sold in 1951, and was lost in a storm north of the Azores while being towed to her final destination. [ 145 ] Minas Geraes was sold two years later and broken up in Genoa beginning in 1954. [ 146 ] Of the Argentine dreadnoughts, Rivadavia was scrapped in Italy beginning in 1959, while Moreno was brought to Japan in 1957. [ 147 ] Almirante Latorre , inactive since 1951, followed Moreno to Japan in 1959. [ 148 ] [ edit ] Historiography Minas Geraes seen from the bow; the wing turrets are on either side of the superstructure The historiography , or works published on a specific topic, behind the South American dreadnought race is relatively small in number and coverage, especially in English. General maritime histories on the period (c. 1904–14) avoid the area and focus on the traditional powers, especially the Anglo-German naval arms race which is commonly cited as a cause of the First World War. The more specific English-language works on the period that do cover South America tend to summarize the region's dreadnought race, focus on the ships built rather than their implications, or look at the closely related 1910 Revolt of the Lash ( Revolta da Chibata ). Seward Livermore, writing from Brown University , looked at the race about thirty years after its conclusion from an American perspective. This meant he gave emphasis to the Argentine order, the role of the American government in obtaining it, and the attempts to obtain the Chilean order. Livermore was mildly critical of the arms race for its destabilizing effects: As a means of promoting closer cooperation or understanding between the two hemispheres the international armament business was of very dubious worth. The peddling of war material to small but quarrelsome nations was fraught with too many unpleasant and unpredictable consequences. Battleship diplomacy had been a novel departure in American statecraft; some material success had been achieved, but the net result, from the standpoint of the imponderable factors, was most unsatisfactorily disappointing. (Seward Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy in South America: 1905–1925," Journal of Modern History 16, no. 1 (1944): 48) British maritime historian Richard Hough , writing in 1966, remarked on the huge cost of the warships and expressed disbelief that the countries thought they could afford the ships in the first place, let alone maintain them as the years went by. He also wondered as to the original purpose of Brazil's ships, as in his view the relations between Brazil and its naval rivals, Argentina and Chile, were quite good given prior context. As Hough saw the situation, the only ones to gain from the whole arms race were the armament companies involved in the ships' construction. [ 149 ] Robert Scheina, a Latin American naval historian, devoted a chapter of his 1987 book, Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987 , to the dreadnought race. Although this was one of the first comprehensive works on the topic of Latin American maritime history, it was criticized by some reviewers for trying to fit too much information into too short a space. [ 150 ] This shows in the dreadnought race's coverage, which was dwarfed by more recent events, especially the Falklands War (seven pages versus fifty-five). [ 151 ] Still, Scheina included a small conclusion to the chapter, where he outlined 'lessons' learned by the three countries in the dreadnought race. Like Hough, he highlighted the exorbitant maintenance costs of the dreadnoughts. In addition, they were meant to be used against other dreadnoughts, but as soon as the traditional powers built dreadnoughts in large numbers, the ones owned by Argentina, Brazil, and Chile were much less of a threat. Last, Scheina pointed out the benefits of international attention, in the form of military alliances, brought by the dreadnoughts, but also noted that this resulted in the same outcome as lesson two—as the years went on, the ships dwindled in importance. [ 152 ] Brazilian historian João Roberto Martins Filho utilized British and Brazilian archival material to focus on the Brazilian dreadnoughts in his Portuguese-language book, A Marinha Brasileira na Era dos Encouraçados, 1895–1910 , or The Brazilian Navy in the Era of Dreadnoughts . He took a very different approach and demonstrated that the Brazilian Navy was not ready for the disruptive influence of modern vessels. By focusing on acquiring the powerful new dreadnoughts, rather than adequately training the huge amounts of manpower needed to crew the ships—a third of the entire navy—or the maintenance necessary to keep the dreadnoughts operational, the navy was without the ability to conduct serious operations soon after their delivery. [ 153 ] In addition, he proposes that the dreadnoughts' modern conditions were not compatible with the liberal use of corporal punishment, providing a crucial spark to the Revolt of the Lash. [ 154 ] [ edit ] Ships involved Ship Country Displacement Main armament Builder Laid down Launched Completed Fate Minas Geraes 18,976 long tons (lt) 19,281 tonnes (t) Twelve 12-inch/45 cal Armstrong Whitworth 17 April 1907 10 September 1908 January 1910 Scrapped beginning 1954 São Paulo 18,803 lt/19,105 t Vickers 30 April 1907 19 April 1909 July 1910 Sank en route to scrapyard, November 1951 Rio de Janeiro 27,410 lt/27,850 t Fourteen 12-inch/45 Armstrong 14 September 1911 22 January 1913 August 1914 Acquired by Ottoman Empire , 1913; taken over by the United Kingdom, 1914; scrapped beginning 1924 Riachuelo 30,000 lt/30500 t Eight 15-inch/45 – – – Canceled after the outbreak of the First World War Rivadavia 27,500 lt/27,900 t Twelve 12-inch/50 Fore River 25 May 1910 26 August 1911 December 1914 Scrapped beginning 1959 Moreno 9 July 1910 23 September 1911 February 1915 Scrapped beginning 1957 Almirante Latorre 28,100 lt/28,600 t Ten 14-inch/45 Armstrong 27 November 1911 27 November 1913 October 1915 Acquired by the United Kingdom, 1914; acquired by Chile, 1920; scrapped beginning 1959 Almirante Cochrane – – 20 February 1913 8 June 1918 February 1924 Acquired by the United Kingdom, 1914; converted to an aircraft carrier ; sunk 11 August 1942 Statistics compiled from: Preston, "Great Britain," 38; Scheina, Naval History , 321–22; ———, "Argentina," 401; ———, "Brazil," 404; Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 249–51, 281–83, 286. The Minas Geraes class was designed, constructed, and completed before the other South American dreadnoughts, but was smaller and not as well-armed. Two later dreadnoughts, Rio de Janeiro and Riachuelo , were planned to rectify this, but the former was sold to the Ottoman Empire amid falling government revenues, and the other was not laid down when the First World War broke out and all British shipbuilding for foreign countries was suspended. [ 155 ] The Rivadavia class was the second dreadnought class purchased by a South American country and the only ones to not be built by a British company. Ordered in response to the Minas Geraes class, they mounted the same-size main battery as the Brazilian ships (12-inch), but the Argentine ships were much larger and significantly better-armored. [ 156 ] Almirante Latorre was the last South American dreadnought built, and was larger and better armed than her counterparts. The more efficient arrangement of the five 14-inch turrets, with all mounted on the centerline rather than en echelon , allowed the main battery to fire on a single broadside without damaging the ship. [ 157 ] Ship plans from the Naval Annual (1915) [ edit ] Footnotes ^ "Minas Geraes" was the spelling when the battleship was commissioned , but later changes to Portuguese orthography deprecated it in favor of "Minas Gerais". Both spellings are used in secondary sources. ^ cf. "Obsolescence" in Pre-dreadnought battleship . ^ For example, the United Kingdom imported large amounts of Argentine grain—most of it shipped through the River Plate —and Chilean nitrates. [ 4 ] ^ Chile's naval tonnage was 36,896 long tons (37,488 t), Argentina's 34,425 long tons (34,977 t), and Brazil's 27,661 long tons (28,105 t). [ 9 ] ^ A professional diplomat and the son of the famed Viscount of Rio Braco , "Pedro II's favorite politician", the Baron of Rio Branco was named as Brazil's Foreign Minister in 1902, and served there until his death in 1912. In that time, he oversaw the signing of many treaties and mediated territorial disputes between Brazil and its neighbors, and became a famous name in his own right. [ 12 ] ^ In reality, the first German dreadnought was commissioned on 1 October 1909, about three months before Brazil's Minas Geraes was completed, despite being laid down two months after the Brazilian ship. [ 30 ] ^ Many contemporary sources reported the varying versions, including: "British-Brazilian Warships," Navy , 11–12; "The Brazilian 'Dreadnoughts'," Navy , 13–14; "The Mystery," World's Work , 10867–68; " Left Behind in Rio ," Boston Evening Transcript , 25 January 1908, 2; " Giant Ships for England or Japan ," New York Herald , 1 July 1908, 9; " Brazil, Japan, and Great Britain ," Sun (New York), 1 July 1908, 6; " The Brazilian Battleships ," Japan Weekly Mail , 5 September 1908, 288; " Germany May Buy English Warships ," New York Times , 9 August 1908, C8; " May Take Brazil's Ships , Day (New London), 19 March 1909, 7; " The Race for Naval Supremacy ," Nelson Evening Mail , 6 April 1909, 2. ^ A series of rumors supporting the Japanese theory, where Brazil was alleged to have placed large armament orders in the United Kingdom on behalf of Japan for use against the United States, was strongly denied by the Brazilian government. Rio Branco, through a telegram sent to the Brazilian ambassador to the United States Joaquim Nabuco , based his counter-argument in the close relationship between Brazilian and American governments, saying "The old and cordial friendship between our countries is known, as well as the excellent relations existing between their governments. ... Every sensible person will understand that an honest and respectable government would not lead itself to play the part attributed to Brazil by the inventor of the news." [ 33 ] ^ While Argentina's principal concern was with Brazil, Chile also wished to respond to a recent Peruvian cruiser order (the Almirante Grau class ). [ 38 ] ^ The end of Zeballos' tenure as Foreign Minister was extremely contentious, as another controversy closely linked to him began shortly after his resignation. In Zeballos' last days as minister, a now-famous Telegram no. 9, sent from the Brazilian government to their representatives in Chile, was intercepted by the Argentine government and decoded. It was read in a congressional session a day after Zeballos' departure, where the new Minister of Foreign Affairs claimed it was proof of intended Brazilian aggression against Argentina. The full contents of the telegram were released by Zeballos to the press, which kindled international disenchantment with Brazil. However, in a public relations coup, Rio Branco released the cipher and actual full contents of the wrongly decoded telegram, proving it contained no reference to belligerent Brazilian intents on Argentina. Zeballos was later accused of deliberately distorting or forging the telegram. Whatever his culpability, his actions in that June may have been motivated by a personal vendetta against Rio Branco, who had bested Zeballos on several occasions since 1875, most notably during a border dispute arbitrated by American President Grover Cleveland (the Question of Palms , or Questão de Palmas ). [ 42 ] ^ The third dreadnought, which was provided for in the original contract and would have been named Rio de Janeiro , was laid down on 16 March 1910. As the ship had already been eclipsed by new naval technology (chiefly the advent of super-dreadnoughts , beginning with the British Orion ), the Brazilian government canceled her on 7 May and asked Armstrong to prepare a new design. The new contract was signed in October, but by November a new naval minister was appointed who had a different design in mind. cf. Third stage: additional Brazilian dreadnoughts . [ 60 ] ^ Livermore and Grant, who cites the Livermore's work, both attribute part of this delay to a 1908 earthquake, [ 62 ] but no major earthquake hit Chile in that year. However, the Valparaíso earthquake of 1906 caused nearly 4,000 deaths, a tsunami, and a wide swath of destruction over the Chilean capital and surrounding areas. Given this, Livermore's 1908 earthquake was most likely a typographical error. ^ Scheina gives 17 November as the launching date, though this appears to be a typographical error. [ 79 ] ^ The surprise acquisition of Rio de Janeiro by the Ottomans caused alarm in the Grecian government, due to what contemporary commentators called the "[assured Ottoman] naval superiority over Greece." [ 95 ] They scrambled to put together offers for the Chilean Almirante Latorre or one of the Argentine dreadnoughts to counter the purchase, which would give the Ottomans two dreadnoughts by the end of 1914 (the other being Reshadieh , later taken over by the British and renamed Erin ). To counter them, Greece would have only had Salamis , which was being built in Germany and scheduled for completion in March 1915, and two entirely obsolete pre-dreadnoughts, Kilkis and Lemnos , purchased from the United States in May 1914. [ 97 ] ^ Other English translations include the "Revolt of the Whip" or the "Revolt against the Lash". ^ Topliss (1985), in writing a design history of the four Brazilian dreadnoughts, makes no mention of Vanterpool's (1969) article, which detailed four substantially different designs prepared in October 1913 by Armstrong. Sturton (1970), whose article was written in direct reply to Vanterpool, found that designs were submitted after that date and that one, bearing little resemblance to anything uncovered by Vanterpool, was ordered. Topliss, on whose research this paragraph is largely based, appears to have expanded upon Sturton's work, but does not include the designs detailed by Vanterpool, even though his article is listed in Topliss' sources. ^ Most sources do not mention that Brazil ordered a battleship; [ 112 ] Conway's even remarks that "Brazil had not selected from the four design variations". [ 113 ] ^ The 1938 date is somewhat variable, as the ship returned to active duty in 1938, but the modernization was not completed until 1940. [ 127 ] Other sources give different dates for the modernization, such as 1934 to 1937. [ 128 ] ^ These were taken over after the beginning of the Second World War and became the Havant class . [ 130 ] ^ Most of the cruisers transferred were from the Brooklyn class , but one of Brazil's cruisers ( Almirante Tamandaré ) was from the slightly improved St. Louis class . [ edit ] Endnotes ^ "The Brazilian Battleship 'Minas Geraes'," Scientific American , 241. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 45–46; Garrett, "Beagle Channel," 85–87. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 45–49, 297–98, 347. ^ Massie, Castles , 204. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 49–52; Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 146. ^ Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 148; Martins, A Marinha Brasileira , 56, 67; Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 32; Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 240. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 45–52; Garrett, "Beagle Channel," 86–88. ^ Martins, A Marinha Brasileira , 50–51; Martins, "Colossos do mares," 75; Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 32. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 32. ^ Scheina, "Brazil," 403; Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 32. ^ Scheina, "Brazil," 403. ^ Barman, Citizen Emperor , 403–04. ^ a b c Scheina, Naval History , 80. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 80; Scheina, "Brazil," 403; Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 240. ^ Martins, A Marinha Brasileira , 80, 128. ^ English, Armed Forces , 108; Scheina, Naval History , 80; Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 147; Martins, A Marinha Brasileira , 75, 78. ^ Martins, A Marinha Brasileira , 80; Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 240–46. ^ Foreign Office, British National Archives 371/201, General Report on Brazil for the Year 1906, W.H.D. Haggard, in Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 149. ^ a b c Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 33. ^ Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 152; Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 33; " New Era in the Americas ," Boston Evening Transcript , 17 November 1906, 1. ^ a b Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 246. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 81. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 81; "Brazil," Naval Engineers , 883; "The Brazilian Navy," Times (London), 28 December 1908, 48f. ^ Grant, '"Rulers, Drugs, and Money , 152. ^ " A Dreadnought For Brazil, " New York Times , 5 March 1907, 5; " Brazilian Navy ," Argus , 7 March 1907, 7; " British & Foreign ," Poverty Bay Herald , 6 March 1907, 6. ^ "The Large Order for Foreign Battleships," Times (London), 28 August 1907, 8f; " Brazil Arming ," Sydney Morning Herald , 29 August 1907, 7. ^ "Brazil," Naval Engineers , 836. ^ "The Mystery," World's Work , 10867. ^ Scheina, "Brazil," 404; Breyer, Battleships , 320. ^ Campbell, "Germany," 145; Scheina, "Brazil," 403. ^ Martins, A Marinha Brasileira , 144–50; Martins, "Colossos do mares", 77; Mead, "Reaction," 238; "The Mystery," World's Work , 10867; "British-Brazilian Warships," Navy , 11; "The Warships for Brazil," Times (London), 14 July 1908, 8c; " The Brazilian Battleships ," Japan Weekly Mail , 5 September 1908, 288. ^ Scheina, "Brazil," 404; Haag, "O Almirante Negro," 89. ^ "The Reported Purchase of Battleships," Navy , 39. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 246; "Naval and Military Intelligence," Times (London), 22 March 1908, 9e; "Naval Policy," Times (London), 24 March 1908, 6e; "Battleships for Brazil," Times (London), 12 May 1908, 4d; "The Warships for Brazil," Times (London), 14 July 1908, 8c; "Naval and Military Intelligence," Times (London), 18 July 1908, 12c; " British and Foreign News ," Evening Post (Wellington), 12 September 1908, 13. ^ " May Take Brazil's Ships , Day (New London), 19 March 1909, 7; "The Brazilian Battleships," Times (London), 23 March 1909, 6d; "House of Commons," Times (London), 23 March 1909, 12a; "The Brazilian Battleships," Times (London), 25 March 1909, 7b; " The Naval Scare ," Sydney Mail , 24 March 1909, 24; " England's Power on the Sea Safe ," New York Herald , 25 March 1908, 9. ^ "The Brazilian Battleships," Times (London), 25 March 1909, 7b. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 32. ^ Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 146–47. ^ Martins, "Colossos do mares," 76. ^ Scheina, "Argentina," 400. ^ Heinsfeld, "Falsificando telegramas," 3–4. ^ Heinsfeld, "Falsificando telegramas," 1–2, 5–10. ^ " A Message From Garcia ," Boston Evening Transcript , 4 June 1910, 3. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 33; Heinsfeld, "Falsificando telegramas," 1; Di Biassi, "Ley de Armamento Naval Nº 6283"; " Brasil's New War Vessels ," New York Herald , 10 September 1908, 8. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 247; " Brazil's Armament, No Menace, but Expresses Sovereignty ," New York Herald , 10 September 1908, 9. ^ Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 156; Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 33; " Argentina's Defense ," Argus , 29 August 1908, 20; " Brazil and Argentina May Fight ," Pittsburg Press , 30 August 1908, 1. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 33; " Argentina and Brazil ," Sydney Morning Herald , 1 October 1908, 7; " Battleships for Argentina ," Sydney Morning Herald , 20 November 1908, 7. ^ Hough, Big Battleship , 19; Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 33; Di Biassi, "Ley de Armamento Naval Nº 6283"; " Dreadnoughts for Argentina ," Sydney Morning Herald , 21 December 1908, 7. ^ a b c Scheina, Naval History , 83. ^ " Argentina's Plans Changed ," New York Times , 5 December 1909, C2. ^ Hough, Big Battleship , 21. ^ Hough, Big Battleship , 22; Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 39. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 38–39. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 42. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 44. ^ Sherrill to Philander C. Knox , No. 415, 11 June 1910, S.D.F., Argentina, in Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 44. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 45. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 44–45. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 249, 254. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 249–63, 281–82. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 40–41. ^ Grant, Ruler, Guns, and Money , 168; Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 40. ^ "Acorazado Almirante Latorre," Unidades Navales . ^ Scheina, Naval History , 138. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 41–42. ^ Schenia, "Peru," 409–10; Schenia, "Ecuador," 414; Schenia, "Uruguay," 424–25; Schenia, "Venezuela," 425. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 321; Scheina, "Brazil," 404; Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 249; "Minas Geraes I," Serviço de Documentação da Marinha — Histórico de Navios ; "São Paulo I," Serviço de Documentação da Marinha — Histórico de Navios . ^ " Launch Greatest Warships ," New York Times , 11 September 1908, 5; " Launch Brazil's Battleship ," New York Times , 20 April 1909, 5. ^ "The Brazilian Battleship," United States Artillery , 185–88; "The Brazilian Battleship," Scientific American , 240–41. ^ "The Minas Geraes," Times (London), 6 January 1910, 4d. ^ "Trials of the Sao Paulo," Times (London), 3 June 1910, 7c; "Gun Trials of the Sao Paulo," Times (London), 4 June 1910, 9b. ^ " Argentine Navy; Dreadnought Orders ," Evening Post (Wellington), 23 March 1910, 4. ^ Scheina, "Argentina," 401; " Launch Rivadavia, Biggest Battleship ," New York Times , 27 August 1911, 7. ^ Scheina, "Argentina," 401; " Moreno Launched For Argentine Navy ," New York Times , 24 September 1911, 12. ^ " Rivadavia Towed Here ," New-York Tribune , 8 August 1913, 4; " The Rivadavia Delayed ," New York Times , 24 August 1914, 7; " New Battleship Disabled ," New York Times , 3 November 1914, 18. ^ Scheina, "Argentina," 401; " Dreadnought Row Ended ," New York Times , 21 February 1915, 1. ^ " Battleship Sinks Barge ," New York Times , 28 March 1915, 5; " The Moreno Again Ashore ," New York Times , 16 April 1915, 8; " Argentine Ship Afloat ," New York Times , 17 April 1915, 6. ^ Burt, British Battleships , 240; Gill, "Professional Notes," 193. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 321. ^ Parkes, British Battleships , 605. ^ Preston, "Great Britain," 37, Scheina, Naval History , 321; Burt, British Battleships , 231, 240; " British Navy Gains ," New York Times , 7 December 1918, 14. ^ Preston, "Great Britain," 37. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 321. ^ Burt, British Battleships , 240. ^ Preston, "Great Britain," 70. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 247–49. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 254–57, 260, 263–64, 268. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 269. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 81–82; Martin, Latin America , 37. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 280. ^ Topliss, "The Brazilian Dreadnought," 284. ^ Vanterpool, "The 'Riachuelo'," 140. ^ Martin, Latin America and the War , 36–37. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 284. ^ a b " Turkish Navy ," Sydney Morning Herald , 31 December 1913, 13. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 284, 286. ^ Kaldis, "Background for Conflict," D1135, D1139; Mach, "Greece," 384. ^ Scheina, Latin America , 321. ^ Morgan, "The Revolt of the Lash," 36–37. ^ José Paranhos, Baron of Rio Branco , in Edmar Morel, A Revolta da Chibata 4th ed. (Rio de Janeiro: Edições Graal, 1986), 13, in Morgan, "The Revolt of the Lash," 37. ^ Morgan, "The Revolt of the Lash," 33, 36–37. ^ Presentation to Federal Congress by Federal Deputy for Rio Grande do Sul, José Carlos de Carvalho , 23 November 1910, in Morel, Revolta , 80–84, in Morgan, "The Revolt of the Lash," 41. ^ Morgan, "The Revolt of the Lash," 40–46. ^ Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 158–59. ^ Foreign Office, British National Archives, 371/1051, Haggard to Sir Edward Grey , 3 February 1911, in Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 159. ^ Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 159. ^ Foreign Office, British National Archives, 371/1518, Haggard to Grey, 19 June 1913, Brazil, Annual Report, 1912, in Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 160. ^ Grant, Rulers, Guns, and Money , 160; Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 283. ^ a b Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 285–86. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 285–86; Sturton, "Re: The Riachuelo," 205. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 285–86; "E Rio de Janeiro," Navios De Guerra Brasileiros . ^ Sturton, "Re: The Riachuelo," 205. ^ Scheina, "Brazil," 405. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 46–47; " Turkey and Greece; Purpose of Dreadnoughts ," Poverty Bay Herald , 2 January 1914, 3; " Argentine Pride Outweighs $6,000,000 Profit Greece Offers for Moreno ," New-York Tribune , 27 April 1913, 3. ^ " Argentine Pride Outweighs $6,000,000 Profit Greece Offers for Moreno ," New-York Tribune , 27 April 1913, 3. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 47. ^ Gill, "Professional Notes," 934; " Turkey Threatened with Another War ," New-York Tribune , 2 November 1913, 12. ^ Kaldis, "Background for Conflict," D1135; Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 45. ^ a b Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 45. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 86. ^ Hough, Big Battleship , 19. ^ Massie, Castles , 22. ^ Fletcher to Bryan, No. 454, Feb. 16, 1914, S.D.F., Chile, in Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 45. ^ English, Armed Forces , 110. ^ English, Armed Forces , 110; Scheina, Naval History , 135–36; Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 48. ^ Whitley, Battleships , 27; Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 289. ^ Topliss, "Brazilian Dreadnoughts," 289. ^ Breyer, Battleships , 320–21; Scheina, Naval History , 153. ^ Whitley, Battleships , 29; Breyer, Battleships , 321. ^ a b Scheina, Naval History , 136–37. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 327. ^ "Bahia (3º)," Serviço de Documentação da Marinha — Histórico de Navios . ^ "Minas Geraes I," Serviço de Documentação da Marinha — Histórico de Navios . ^ English, Armed Forces , 38–39. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 48; Graser Schornstheimer, " Chile as a Naval Power ," New York Times , 22 August 1920, X10. ^ Preston, "Great Britain," 70; Brown, "HMS Eagle ," 251. ^ Somervell, "Naval Affairs," 393–94. ^ Livermore, "Battleship Diplomacy," 48. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 139. ^ English, Armed Forces , 148. ^ Whitley, Battleships , 33. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 112–14; Sater, "The Abortive Kronstadt," 240–253. ^ English, Armed Forces , 149. ^ English, Armed Forces , 149; Scheina, Naval History , 164. ^ "São Paulo I," Serviço de Documentação da Marinha — Histórico de Navios ; "E São Paulo," Navios De Guerra Brasileiros . ^ "E Minas Geraes," Navios De Guerra Brasileiros . ^ Whitley, Battleships , 21–22. ^ "Whitley, Battleships , 33; "Acorazado Almirante Latorre," Unidades Navales . ^ Hough, Big Battleship , 16–17. ^ Waddell, "Robert L. Scheina," 509; Sater, " Latin America ," 592. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 80–87, 234–289. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 86–87. ^ Martins, A Marinha Brasileira , 201; de Almeida, " A Marinha Brasileira ," 164; Haag, "O Almirante Negro," 87. ^ Haag, "O Almirante Negro," 85. ^ Scheina, Naval History , 82; Vanterpool, "The 'Riachuelo'," 140. ^ Scheina, Naval History, 82; Scheina, "Argentina," 401; Scheina, "Brazil," 404. ^ Whitley, Battleships , 20; Preston, "Great Britain," 38. [ edit ] References Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Minas Geraes class battleship or Rivadavia class battleship or Almirante Latorre class battleship " Acorazado Almirante Latorre [Battleship Almirante Latorre]." Unidades Navales . Armada de Chile. Last modified 8 June 2008. " Bahia (3º) ." Serviço de Documentação da Marinha — Histórico de Navios . Diretoria do Patrimônio Histórico e Documentação da Marinha, Departamento de História Marítima. Accessed 1 March 2012. Barman, Roderick J. Citizen Emperor: Pedro II and the Making of Brazil, 1825–1891 . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-80473-510-7 . OCLC 41621323 . " Brazil ." Journal of the American Society of Naval Engineers 20, no. 3 (1909): 833–36. ISSN 0099-7056 . OCLC 3227025 . Breyer, Siegfried. Battleships and Battle Cruisers, 1905–1970 . Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1973. OCLC 702840 . " British-Brazilian Warships ." Navy (Washington) 2, no. 1 (1908): 11–12. OCLC 7550453 . Brown, David. "HMS Eagle ." In Profile Warship , edited by Antony Preston , 249–72. Windsor, UK: Profile Publishing, 1973. ISSN 1754-4459 . OCLC 249286023 . Burt, R. A. British Battleships of World War One . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press , 1986. ISBN 0-87021-863-8 . OCLC 14224148 Campbell, N.J.M. "Germany." In Gardiner and Gray, Conway's , 134–89. de Almeida, Francisco Eduardo Alves. " Resenha: A Marinha Brasileira na Era dos Encouraçados, 1895-1910 [Review: The Brazilian Navy in the Era of Dreadnoughts, 1895–1910 ]." Revista da Escola de Guerra Naval , no. 15 (2010): 163–64. ISSN 1809-3191 . OCLC 110862459 . Di Biassi, Francesco Venturini. " Ley de Armamento Naval Nº 6283 [Naval Armament Law No. 6283]." Departamento de Estudios Históricos Navales. Accessed 1 March 2012. " E Minas Geraes ." Navios De Guerra Brasileiros . Accessed 1 March 2012. " E Rio de Janeiro ." Navios De Guerra Brasileiros . Accessed 1 March 2012. " E São Paulo ." Navios De Guerra Brasileiros . Accessed 1 March 2012. English, Adrian J. Armed Forces of Latin America . London: Jane's Publishing Inc., 1984. ISBN 0-71060-321-5 . OCLC 11537114 . Gardiner, Robert and Randal Gray, eds. Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships: 1906–1921 . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1984. ISBN 0-87021-907-3 . OCLC 12119866 . Garrett, James L. "The Beagle Channel Dispute: Confrontation and Negotiation in the Southern Cone." Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 27, no. 3 (1985): 81–109. JSTOR 165601 . ISSN 0022-1937 . OCLC 2239844 . Gill, C.C. "Professional Notes." Proceedings 40, no. 1 (1914): 186–272. ISSN 0041-798X . OCLC 2496995 . ———. "Professional Notes." Proceedings 40, no. 3 (1914): 835–947. Grant, Jonathan A. Rulers, Guns, and Money: The Global Arms Trade in the Age of Imperialism . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007. ISBN 0674024427 . OCLC 166262725 . Haag, Carlos. " O Almirante Negro e seu Encouraçado Prateado [The Black Admiral and his Silver Battleship]." Pesquisa FAPESP 166, no. 12 (2009): 84–89. OCLC 644494445 . Heinsfeld, Adelar. " Falsificando telegramas: Estanislau Severo Zeballos e as relações Brasil-Argentina no início século XX ." Vestígios do passado: a história e suas fontes . Proceedings from the IX Encontro Estadual de História of the Associação Nacional de História, Seção Rio Grande do Sul. Hough, Richard . The Big Battleship . London: Michael Joseph, 1966. OCLC 8898108 . Kaldis, William Peter. "Background for Conflict: Greece, Turkey, and the Aegean Islands, 1912–1914." Journal of Modern History 51, no. 2 (1979): D1119–D1146. JSTOR 1881125 . ISSN 0022-2801 . OCLC 62219150 . Livermore, Seward W . " Battleship Diplomacy in South America: 1905–1925 ." Journal of Modern History 16, no. 1 (1944): 31–48. JSTOR 1870986 . ISSN 0022-2801 . OCLC 62219150 . Martin, Percy Allen. Latin America and the War . Gloucester, MA: Peter Smith, 1967. First published 1925 by Johns Hopkins Press. OCLC 468553769 . Martins, João Roberto, Filho . A Marinha Brasileira na Era dos Encouraçados, 1895–1910 [ The Brazilian Navy in the Era of Dreadnoughts, 1895–1910 ]. Rio de Janeiro: FGV Editora, 2010. ISBN 8-52250-803-8 . OCLC 679733899 . ———. " Colossos do mares [Colossuses of the Seas]." Revista de História da Biblioteca Nacional 3, no. 27 (2007): 74–77. ISSN 1808-4001 . OCLC 61697383 . Mead, Edwin D. "Reaction in South America." Advocate of Peace 70, no. 10 (1908): 238–41. JSTOR 20665593 . OCLC 436909525 . Morgan, Zachary R. "The Revolt of the Lash, 1910." In Naval Mutinies of the Twentieth Century: An International Perspective , edited by Christopher M. Bell and Bruce A. Elleman, 32–53. Portland, Oregon: Frank Cass Publishers, 2003. ISBN 0-71468-468-6 . OCLC 464313205 . " Minas Geraes I ." Serviço de Documentação da Marinha — Histórico de Navios . Diretoria do Patrimônio Histórico e Documentação da Marinha, Departamento de História Marítima. Accessed 1 March 2012. [Note] Montenegro, Guillermo J. " An Argentinian Naval Buildup in the Disarmament Era: The Naval Procurement Act of 1926 ." Universidad del Centro de Estudios Macroeconómicos de Argentina . Also published in Antony Preston, ed. Warship 2002–2003 . London: Conways Maritime Press, 2003. ISBN 0-85177-926-3 . OCLC 50614660 . Parkes, Oscar. British Battleships . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1990. First published 1957 by Seeley Service. ISBN 1-55750-075-4 . OCLC 22240716 . Preston, Antony. "Great Britain." In Gardiner and Gray, Conway's , 1–104. " São Paulo I ." Serviço de Documentação da Marinha — Histórico de Navios . Diretoria do Patrimônio Histórico e Documentação da Marinha, Departamento de História Marítima. Accessed 1 March 2012. Sater, William F. " Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987 . By Robert L. Scheina." Hispanic American Historical Review 68, no. 3 (1988): 592. JSTOR 2516533 . ISSN 0018-2168 . OCLC 421498310 . ———. "The Abortive Kronstadt: The Chilean Naval Mutiny of 1931." Hispanic American Historical Review 60, no. 2 (1980): 239–68. JSTOR 2513217 . Scheina, Robert L. "Argentina." In Gardiner and Gray, Conway's , 400–03. ———. "Brazil." In Gardiner and Gray, Conway's , 403–07. ———. "Ecuador." In Gardiner and Gray, Conway's , 409–10. ———. Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987 . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1987. ISBN 0-87021-295-8 . OCLC 15696006 . ———. "Peru." In Gardiner and Gray, Conway's , 414. ———. "Uruguay." In Gardiner and Gray, Conway's , 424–25. ———. "Venezuela." In Gardiner and Gray, Conway's , 425. Somervell, Philip. "Naval Affairs in Chilean Politics, 1910–1932." Journal of Latin American Studies 16, no. 2 (1984): 381–402. JSTOR 157427 . ISSN 1469-767X . OCLC 47076058 . Sturton, Ian. "Re: The Riachuelo." Warship International 7, no. 3 (1970): 205. ISSN 0043-0374 . OCLC 1647131 . " The Brazilian Battleship 'Minas Geraes' ." Journal of the United States Artillery 33, no. 2 (1910): 179–88. ISSN 0097-3785 . OCLC 1962282 . "The Brazilian Battleship 'Minas Geraes'." Scientific American 102, no. 12 (1910): 240–41. ISSN 0036-8733 . OCLC 1775222 . " The Brazilian Dreadnoughts ." International Marine Engineering 13, no. 8 (1908): 362–63. ISSN 0272-2879 . OCLC 2227478 . " The Brazilian 'Dreadnoughts' ." Navy (Washington) 2, no. 6 (1908): 13–14. OCLC 7550453 . " The Mystery of the Great Brazilian Dreadnoughts ," World's Work 17, no. 1 (1909): 10867–68. OCLC 42300671 . Topliss, David. "The Brazilian Dreadnoughts, 1904–1914." Warship International 25, no. 3 (1988): 240–89. OCLC 1647131 . " The Reported Purchase of Battleships ." Navy (Washington) 2, no. 8 (1908): 39. OCLC 7550453 . Vanterpool, Alan. "The 'Riachuelo'." Warship International 6, no. 2 (1969): 140–41. OCLC 7550453 . Waddell, D.A.G. "Robert L. Scheina, Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987 ." Journal of Latin American Studies 20, no. 2 (1988): 509. JSTOR 156756 . ISSN 0022-216X . OCLC 1800137 . Whitley, M.J. Battleships of World War Two: An International Encyclopedia . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1998. ISBN 1-55750-184-X . OCLC 40834665 . v t e South American dreadnoughts Brazil Minas Geraes class Minas Geraes São Paulo Rio de Janeiro (later Ottoman Sultan Osman I , British Agincourt ) Riachuelo Argentina Rivadavia class Rivadavia Moreno Chile Almirante Latorre class Almirante Latorre Almirante Cochrane (later British Eagle )